Monoclonal gammopathy is the presence of a monoclonal protein (M protein) in the serum or urine. It consists of one of the immunoglobulins, a heavy chain, and/or a light chain. Biclonal gammopathy is noted in about 2% of cases. Monoclonal gammopathy may be seen in a variety of diseases, both benign and malignant.

A. The focus of the initial workup is to recognize, quantitate, and characterize the abnormal protein present in serum and urine using serum protein electrophoresis (SPEP), immunoelectrophoresis (IEP), urine protein electrophoresis (UPEP), and serum free light chain assay and to determine whether there is evidence of a coexisting disorder that requires treatment. The bone survey and marrow examination are especially helpful in excluding multiple myeloma.
B. Patients with elevated IgG, A, D, or E may have a solitary plasmacytoma of bone, multiple myeloma, amyloidosis, or a monoclonal gammopathy of unknown significance (MGUS). Patients with monoclonal IgM may have MGUS, Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia, amyloid, or cryoglobulinemia. The listed screening examinations guide the diagnosis. Statistically, most patients with a monoclonal gammopathy have MGUS. Of the 873 cases of monoclonal gammopathy evaluated at the Mayo Clinic as of 1988, 64% had MGUS and 16% had multiple myeloma. Less common diagnoses were amyloidosis(8%), non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (6%), chronic lymphocytic leukemia (2%), solitary or extramedullary plasmacytoma (2%), and Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia (2%).
C. Solitary plasmacytoma of bone occasionally presents with a monoclonal gammopathy (50%), although half of the patients show no M component in either serum or urine. The diagnosis is based on histologic evidence of a tumor consisting of plasma cells, identical to those seen in multiple myeloma, and confined to a single bone site. Levels of uninvolved immunoglobulins usually are preserved. In addition to standard studies for myeloma, MRI of the thoracic and lumbosacral spine is useful to confirm the diagnosis of multiple myeloma. Radiotherapy of 45 Gy is the treatment of choice. Although >50% of the patients will be alive at 10 years, the disease-free survival is only 15%-45% because most patients develop multiple myeloma. In 60 previously untreated patients with solitary plasmacytoma of bone treated at MD Anderson Cancer Center between 1965 and 2000, median survival from completion of radiotherapy was 11 years. Patients most likely to have a prolonged disease-free survival are those whose M protein completely disappears, as measured by the most sensitive tests, within 1 year of radiotherapy. Accordingly, periodic follow-up with SPEP, IEP, and UPEP is indicated in all patients with an abnormality before treatment.
D. Extramedullary plasmacytoma is a plasma cell tumor that arises outside the bone marrow, most often in the upper respiratory tract, including the nasal cavity and sinuses, nasopharynx, and larynx. Patients generally do not have a detectable M component in either serum or urine, so detection of a monoclonal protein usually indicates multiple myeloma. The diagnosis is based on the finding of a plasma cell tumor in an extramedullary site, the absence of multiple myeloma in the bone marrow, and no lytic lesions in the bone survey. Fewer than 25% of patients have evidence of a monoclonal protein in the serum or urine by electrophoresis or immunofixation. Radiotherapy provides disease-free survival exceeding 10 years in 50%-65% of patients.
E. Because of more frequent screening of blood chemistries and counts, about 20% of patients with multiple myeloma are now recognized by chance without significant symptoms or signs of disease (asymptomatic multiple myeloma). Asymptomatic disease generally is characterized by a serum M protein of <4.5 g/dl and the absence of lytic bone lesions, anemia (hemoglobin >10.5 g/dl), hypercalcemia, renal failure attributable to myeloma, and symptoms of disease. A subset of these patients may have long-term stability of disease. At our center, risk factors for disease progression include IgA subtype and serum M protein >3.0 g/dl. Patients with none of these features may be followed by observation, as are patients with MGUS because they remain stable for many years (low risk to progression), whereas patients with two features have a median time to progression of 18 months (high risk). An abnormal MRI result of the spine appears equally effective in predicting patients at risk for early progression to symptomatic disease (median 18 months). To avoid complications of disease, early chemotherapy may be an option for patients at high risk. Patients with one risk feature (intermediate risk) can be separated into low- or high-risk categories by MRI of the spine.
F. The presence of multiple lytic lesions with >10% plasma cells in the bone marrow, any serum M component, and/or light chains in the urine indicates multiple myeloma. The most common complications of this disease are bone pain (usually from fractures), hypercalcemia, infection, and renal failure. Chemotherapy with melphalan-based regimens alone results in a median survival of 3 years. However, a study by the Intergroupe Francais du Myelome found that autologous stem cell transplantation improved 5-year overall survival rates from 12% to 52%. Newer thalidomide-, lenalidomide-, and bortezomib-based therapies have improved survival in randomized trials and are expected to affect overall median survival; however, this is not yet reflected in SEER data statistics.
G. MGUS indicates the presence of an M component in patients without multiple myeloma, solitary plasmacytoma of bone, extramedullary plasmacytoma, amyloidosis, macroglobulinemia, or other lymphoproliferative disorders. MGUS is characterized by an M component <3.0 g/dl, generally preserved uninvolved immunoglobulins, normal CBC, low levels of marrow plasmacytosis, no lytic lesions or hypercalcemia, and the absence of renal failure attributable to multiple myeloma. More important, over a long period the M component usually remains stable and no additional abnormalities must develop. The incidence of MGUS increases with age, reaching approximately 7.5% in patients >85 years old. In a large series of 1384 patients with MGUS, the concentration of the M component ranged between immeasurable and 3.0 g/dl (median 1.2-1.3 g/dl). IEP revealed IgG in 70%, IgA in 12%, IgM in 15%, and biclonal gammopathy in 3% of patients. The light-chain type was kappa in 61% and lambda in 39%. Bone marrow specimens from 160 of these patients revealed a low level of marrow plasmacytosis (0%-10%, median 3%). Multiple myeloma, amyloidosis, macroglobulinemia, or other lymphoproliferative processes developed in 8% of the patients, with an actuarial rate of 10% at 10 years, 21% at 20 years, and 26% at 25 years. Most patients with progressive disease developed multiple myeloma (65%). In a similar study by the same authors, the time from diagnosis of MGUS to development of multiple myeloma ranged from 1 to 32 years (median 10 years), indicating that such patients must be followed indefinitely.
H. The presenting manifestations of primary amyloidosis include weakness, weight loss, ankle edema, dyspnea, parasthesias, lightheadedness, syncope, peripheral neuropathy, carpal tunnel syndrome, congestive heart failure, nephrosis, periorbital purpura, arthralgia, orthostatic hypotension, macroglossia, and diarrhea with malabsorption syndrome. Abdominal fat aspiration at an experienced center, using a 19-gauge needle, has a sensitivity of 70%-80%, and only 13% of patients with amyloidosis will not have evidence of amyloid deposition on either abdominal fat aspiration or bone marrow biopsy. The most effective treatment for primary amyloidosis is high-dose melphalan followed by autologous stem cell transplantation. Other regimens, including melphalan and prednisone, high-dose dexamethasone-based therapies, and thalidomide-based therapies, may also provide some benefit.
I. Patients with an elevated IgM (often <2 g/dl) and peripheral adenopathy often have an underlying B-cell neoplasm. In a series of 213 patients with an IgM MGUS diagnosed at the Mayo Clinic between 1960 and 1994, 14% developed non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia, primary amyloidosis, or chronic lymphocytic leukemia. The median duration from presentation with MGUS until the diagnosis of the lymphoma was 4 years (range 0.4–22 years). Given the long latency period before development of associated malignancies in some patients, periodic follow-up should continue indefinitely.
J. Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia is a rare disease (one seventh as common as myeloma) and is the result of an uncontrolled proliferation of lymphoplasmacytoid cells in which a large monoclonal IgM is produced. The presenting signs and symptoms include weakness, fatigue, bleeding (especially oozing from the oronasal area), blurred vision, dyspnea, weight loss, paresthesias, retinal lesions (“sausage” or “boxcar” formation), hepatosplenomegaly, and lymphadenopathy. IgM levels often are >3 g/dl. Initial treatment for symptomatic patients traditionally has been with alkylating agents such as chlorambucil, which produces remission rates of 50%-60%. More recently treatment with nucleoside analogs (cladribine or fludarabine) induced responses of 70%-80% in previously untreated patients. When nucleoside analogs are combined with alkylating agents (e.g., cyclophosphamide) and the monoclonal antibody rituximab, response rates of up to 90% can be seen.

