The decline in cervical cancer from the first to the seventh most common cancer among women in the United States is directly attributable to the use of screening Pap smears. The Pap smear is both sensitive and specific for pathology of the genital tract, including the vagina, cervix, uterus, and occasionally, even fallopian tubes and ovaries. The Bethesda System (TBS) was adopted in 1988 (revised in 1991) in an attempt to establish national standards for an industry that had been heavily criticized for its lack of standards and inadequate quality assurance. Its creation established the cytopathology report as a medical consultation and displaced the former Papanicolaou classification. With TBS cytopathologists must first determine the adequacy of the sample and then distinguish among inflammatory, infectious, and neoplastic processes. TBS adopted two new terms, low- and high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions (SIL), to replace the previous terminology, exclusive of invasive carcinoma. Some cytopathologists may still use the former classifications of dysplasia, cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) 1-3. The new descriptive nomenclature, which includes the classifications of atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance (ASC-US) and low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (LSIL), has caused management controversy equal to that of the previous system.
A. Cervical cytopathology is strongly associated with sexual activity and human papillomavirus (HPV) infection, which is considered a sexually transmitted disease (STD). A complete gynecologic history, including STD history, age at first coitus, number of sexual partners, use of tobacco products, and previous abnormal cervical cytopathology with concomitant diagnostic procedures and treatment, is important in the evaluation of a patient with an abnormal Pap smear.
B. Evaluation of the female genital tract requires the best illumination and the proper size and shape of speculum to optimize visualization. Initially, examine the unprepared vulvar, vaginal, and cervical epithelium for whitish patches, growths, or ulcerations. Remember that the use of bactericidal or bacteriostatic lubricants compromises the culture and cytopathology results. Cervical friability, with or without an associated lesion, can represent an infectious condition or a neoplastic one. When a Pap smear is judged unsatisfactory, it usually is because of either the absence of endocervical cells or drying artifact. A properly obtained Pap smear contains exophytic and endophytic cervical cells to maximize the probability of sampling the transformation zone. A moistened cotton-tipped applicator and a spatula generally suffice. The endocervical brush collects a better endocervical sampling at an increased cost, with greater patient discomfort, and a higher risk of provoking bleeding that can obscure the cervical field. HPV DNA identification and cervicography are newer techniques developed to better identify patients at risk for invasive carcinoma by improving sensitivity and specificity. Pap-net and the ThinPrep Pap Test, a liquid-based test, are newer screening technologies that may replace the conventional Pap smear. An advantage of the liquid-based Pap test is that it allows for “reflexive HPV testing" if the result is ASC-US. If HPV is present in the sample, the patient can proceed directly to colposcopy and not have to undergo several repeat tests to confirm the finding.
C. Consider the finding of ASC-US in a “satisfactory" Pap smear in the context of the patient's individual risk factors. For patients at risk or those with straightforward SIL, proceed with colposcopy and colposcopically directed biopsies. Loop electroexcision procedure (LEEP) has led some experienced colposcopists to collect a surgical specimen for diagnosis simultaneous with definitive surgical treatment. Patients exhibiting primary ASC-US associated with HPV derive minimal benefit from ablative therapy. Even many patients diagnosed with LSIL (60%) have spontaneous regression of their lesions without treatment. From the standpoint of infectious disease, patients with identifiable lesions benefit from ablative therapy, as do those with significant dysplasia. Cryoablation is preferred, but various topical preparations, laser therapy, LEEP, and cold-knife conization continue to be used. Management of patients with LSIL must be individualized to include the assessment of patient compliance with follow-up. After each specific intervention, reassess the cervix at 4- to 6-month intervals for 2 years, or until there have been three consecutive negative Pap smears. Annual surveillance may then resume.
D. Because abnormal Pap smears are strongly associated with HPV, consider other STDs in the evaluation of these patients. Cervicitis (see p 578) may be caused by more than one genital tract pathogen and may require collection of cultures and initiation of antibiotic therapy. Recurrent dysplasia should prompt further assessment of risk factors, such as smoking, chronic disease, and HIV status.
E. The cervix regularly rests in the posterior vaginal fornix, contributing to its exfoliated cells and those arising from the upper genital tract (endocervix, uterus, fallopian tube, and rarely, ovary). When normal endometrial or glandular cells are reported on the routine Pap smear, no further evaluation is needed. However, TBS allows a more precise characterization of the cell type and its morphology. In cases of atypical or neoplastic glandular cells, there is a high risk that a malignancy is present and further evaluation and treatment of the upper genital tract by an oncologic gynecologist is required.