ACUTE DIARRHEA
A. Diarrhea is one of the most common complaints
resulting in visits to a physician. The history and physical examination (including rectal examination) are
critical in determining who needs further diagnostic
evaluation and in selecting appropriate therapy.
Important questions to ask are duration of illness; volume of stool; presence of blood or pus in stool; and
symptoms of systemic illness such as fever, anorexia,
weight loss, and volume depletion. Most patients
should not undergo further evaluation at this time, but
they should be treated symptomatically. However, the
presence of systemic symptoms dictates that the stool
be more closely evaluated for evidence of invasive
infection or inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).
B. The simplest test that can be performed in the office to
evaluate inflammatory changes of the bowel mucosa is
to inspect by microscopy a fecal sample for WBCs/
RBCs. The presence of either of these implies infection
with invasive organisms and/or IBD.
C. To evaluate infection by an invasive bacterial organism, a
stool culture is necessary. Most clinical laboratories
routinely test for Shigella, Salmonella, and Campylobacter spp. If travel or other historical features suggest
other pathogens, more specific testing for Amoeba,
Yersinia spp., or Clostridium difficile and others may be
necessary. In certain clinical situations, testing for certain

202

types of Escherichia coli may be prudent. In patients
with HIV disease, testing for unusual pathogens
(e.g., cryptosporidia, mycobacteria) may be necessary.
D. In patients who have WBCs/RBCs in the stool and a
negative culture, or those without inflammatory cells
but continued diarrhea, perform flexible sigmoidoscopy to evaluate for IBD, which may be present even
if the mucosa is grossly normal appearing. Therefore, a
biopsy is helpful in detecting minimal mucosal changes.
In addition, the histologic appearance in the setting of
gross inflammatory changes can help differentiate
acute infectious self-limited colitis from IBD. Generally, perform a biopsy irrespective of gross findings.
E. In patients with negative cultures and sigmoidoscopy but
continued diarrhea, further evaluation may be required.

References
Fedorak R. Antidiarrheal therapy. Dig Dis Sci 1987;32:195.
Harris JC, DuPont HL, Hornick RB. Fecal leukocytes in diarrheal illness.
Ann Intern Med 1972;76:697.
Plotkin G. Gastroenteritis: etiology, pathophysiology and clinical manifestations. Medicine 1979;58:95.
Slutsker L, Ries AA, Greene KD, et al. Escherichia coli O157:H7 diarrhea in the Unites States: clinical and epidemiologic features. Ann
Intern Med 1997;126:505.

203
Patient with ACUTE DIARRHEA

A History

Physical examination

Fever or
systemic
symptoms

No fever or
systemic
symptoms

B Microscopic

Treat Symptomatically

examination
of stool for
WBC/RBC

Negative

Positive

Treat Symptomatically

Improvement

Diarrhea
continues

D

enteric pathogens

Negative

Positive

Diarrhea
continues

Treat Accordingly

Flexible
Sigmoidoscopy
with Biopsy

Normal

E See Chronic

C Culture for

Diarrhea (p 204)

Abnormal
Treat Accordingly

