ACUTE ABDOMINAL PAIN


Acute abdominal pain is a common clinical presentation in
the emergency department and primary care setting. The
clinician addressing the patient with acute abdominal pain
ideally should eliminate acute medical causes of abdominal
pain and recognize the proper setting for surgical consultation. There should be a low threshold for involving surgical
expertise. History and physical examination are critical in
evaluation. Admission for evaluation is common and should
be considered for acute pain without obvious surgical
indication that persists for 6 hours. Abdominal pain can
be visceral, parietal, and referred. Noxious stimulation
affecting abdominal viscera produces dull and usually
poorly localized pain to the ventral midline of the abdomen. This can be explained by multisegmental innervation
of the affected organs. Irritation of the parietal peritoneum
produces more localized and often more severe pain.
Finally, referred pain is experienced in remote areas
from the site of injury because these areas share the same
segmental innervation as the involved organ.
A. A careful history can narrow the differential diagnosis.
Age and sex are important considerations. Mesenteric
adenitis occurs in younger persons, whereas vascular and
neoplastic disease occur in elderly persons. In a sexually
active female, consider ectopic pregnancy or pelvic
inflammatory disease. Medical history can reveal previous
peptic ulcer disease, gallstones, diverticular disease,
inflammatory bowel disease, and abdominal surgery.
Medication history can disclose corticosteroid or immunosuppressant use. Coexisting medical conditions such as
diabetes mellitus can affect the presentation. The
onset and character of the pain are important. A sudden
onset of intense, localized, “somatic” pain suggests peritonitis, as is seen with perforation of the bowel. Crescendodecrescendo “visceral” pain or colic is more characteristic
of bowel, cystic duct, or ureteral obstruction. An evolving
pain pattern, visceral at first and later somatic, may suggest appendicitis, cholecystitis, or strangulated bowel.
Disproportionate pain compared with a lesser physical
finding occurs with ischemia. Characteristic radiation patterns are noted with cholecystitis (scapula), pancreatitis
(back), and appendicitis (right lower quadrant).
B. Observe the patient before the examination. Visceral
pain usually causes restlessness; parietal pain increases
with movement. Auscultate the abdomen for bruits,
rubs, and bowel sounds. Palpation should begin away
from the site of pain. Involuntary guarding or rebound
tenderness, especially with light percussion, implies
peritonitis. Deeper palpation can be used to search for
166

C.

D.

E.

F.

organomegaly or masses. Perform rectal and pelvic
examinations. Examine the hernial orifices in the groin
and, as indicated, examine the external genitalia.
A patient who is hemodynamically unstable with
possible intraabdominal hemorrhage may require
immediate laparotomy. The patient who is acutely ill
with hypotension, high fever, leukocytosis, and a
suggestive physical examination (involuntary guarding,
rigidity, increasing severe tenderness) should also
undergo immediate surgical evaluation. Suspected
bowel ischemia with acidosis, fever, and evidence of
hypovolemia also should be evaluated surgically, as
should the patient with evidence of perforation by
plain radiography, contrast study, or paracentesis.
Resuscitation is critical both before and during further
evaluation, including possible ventilatory support IV
access and fluids, nasogastric suction, oxygen, and
urinary output monitoring; frequent checks of vital
signs and preliminary laboratory tests also should be
done. Ideally, important medical causes of acute pain
can be ruled out before surgery with urinalysis,
electrocardiography, and abdominal films.
The patient who is more stable should be observed
closely. Medical causes of acute abdominal pain can be
ruled out, although the list can be extensive. The more
common causes are acute pneumonitis, especially lower
lobe; pyelonephritis; and mesenteric adenitis. Collagen
vascular disease can cause perforation. Multiple metabolic disorders, including diabetic ketoacidosis, Addisonian crisis, uremia, and acute intermittent porphyria,
can lead to abdominal pain. A history of chronic liver
disease with ascites may suggest spontaneous bacterial
peritonitis.
Certain patients may present with a discrepancy
between severity of disease and physical findings.
These include patients who are elderly, malnourished,
obese, immunosuppressed, or taking steroids; early
postoperative patients; those with mental status
changes; and patients with paraplegia.
Laboratory evaluation should include hemoglobin/
hematocrit, white blood cell count, differential, electrolytes, blood gases, amylase, liver tests, coagulation times,
and urinalysis. A serum pregnancy test is mandatory in
any woman of childbearing age. Supine and upright
abdominal films may suggest obstruction, ischemia, perforation, renal calculi, or intraabdominal abscess. Also a
chest x-ray study is helpful in identifying potential thoracic causes of referred pain. Angiography is useful for
suspected hemorrhage or ischemia. Contrast studies are

167
Patient with ACUTE ABDOMINAL PAIN

A History
B Physical examination
C Unstable

D Stable

or
Obvious surgical
indication

Observation
Exclude:
Medical
causes

Consider:
Hemorrhage
Perforation
Acute peritonitis
Bowel obstruction
Ischemia

E Consider:

Inadequate physical
manifestations

F Further studies

Resuscitation
Surgical consultation

Continued pain
Increased pain

LAPAROTOMY

G Surgical

Decreased pain
Observation

consultation

useful for suspected perforation. Ultrasonography and
CT imaging can demonstrate pancreatitis, cholecystitis,
abscess, retroperitoneal mass, or dilated biliary tree. CT
scan has a high diagnostic yield for many causes of abdominal pain. For example, in the diagnosis of
appendicitis, it is reported to have a sensitivity and
specificity of 98% and 97%, respectively. Ultrasonography may be an initial modality of testing for a suspected
hepatobiliary origin of pain and is shown to have similar
diagnostic accuracy.
G. Close observation may disclose an evolutionary pattern
to the abdominal pain syndrome. If acute pain persists
!6 hours, obtain a surgical consultation if this has not
already been requested.

References
Flasar MH, Goldberg E. Acute abdominal pain. Med Clin North Am
2006;90(2):481–503.
Glasgow RE, Mulvihill SJ. Abdominal pain. In Sleisenger and Fordtran’s
Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease: Pathophysiology, Diagnosis and
Management, 7th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2002:71–82.
Gupta H, Dupuy D. Advances in imaging of the acute abdomen. Surg
Clin North Am 1997;77(6):1245–1263.
Raman SS, Lu DS, Kadell BM, et al. Accuracy of nonfocused helical CT for
the diagnosis of acute appendicitis: a 5 year review. Am J Roentgenol
2002;178(6);1319–1325.

