ACUTE STROKE

Stroke is the acute onset of a focal neurologic deficit or
disturbance in the level of arousal resulting from cerebral
ischemia, hemorrhage, or venous occlusion. It is a medical
emergency and requires full attention of the practitioner
until a diagnosis is made and therapy is initiated.
A. Initial evaluation consists of ensuring the “ABCs” of
airway, breathing, and (cardiopulmonary) circulation.
Even if ABCs are intact at first assessment, ischemic and
hemorrhagic strokes can evolve rapidly and cause depressed consciousness or coma, ultimately requiring assisted ventilation. Vital signs should be noted on initial
contact with the patient. Patients with ischemic stroke
may benefit from hypertension in the acute setting (ensuring continued perfusion to areas of brain tissue at risk
for ischemia), whereas patients with hemorrhagic stroke
may require urgent blood pressure reduction. Management of elevated blood pressure should thus be deferred
until CT imaging clarifies the presence or absence of
intracranial hemorrhage.
B. A focused history obtained from the patient and/or eyewitness is vital; often the history alone will distinguish
between stroke types. Particular attention to the time of
symptom onset can be critical to subsequent diagnostic
and treatment decisions. If someone witnessed the patient become ill, document the onset time. Otherwise,
determine the time when the patient was last seen as
his or her normal self. Additional questions to ask of
witnesses (and the patient, when possible) include: Has
anything like this ever happened before? Was there a
headache? What was the onset and severity of the headache? Was there a loss of consciousness? Was there a
recent head or neck injury? Were there any rhythmic
limb, head, or eye movements? It is important to maintain a broad differential, particularly for stroke mimics
(e.g., seizure with postictal paralysis, complicated migraine, metabolic/infectious exacerbation of deficits from
a prior stroke) while quickly obtaining the history.
C. A focused neurologic examination should then be performed. Completion of the National Institutes of Health
Stroke Scale (NIHSS) provides a valuable summary of
neurologic function that is easily communicated to other

414

providers and can be used to track clinical improvement
or decline over time. Because stroke severity can fluctuate, particularly in the first few hours after onset, repeated examination is warranted. Baseline laboratories
(Chem-7, CBC with differential, platelet count, coagulation parameters, cardiac enzymes) should be drawn and
sent as soon as stroke is considered in the differential
diagnosis.
D. An urgent noncontrast CT scan of the head is indicated
for all persons presenting with possible stroke. If an
ischemic stroke is suspected, the CT may show only
subtle signs of ischemia or may even appear normal.
Patients who present with ischemic stroke symptoms of
!3 hours’ duration and a CT scan without evidence of
intracranial hemorrhage should be considered immediately for IV thrombolysis with tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) according to locally developed protocols. In
some centers, urgent imaging of the cerebral vasculature (by CT or magnetic resonance angiography) as
well as diffusion-weighted MRI can provide further
information about stroke size and/or the precise location of cerebrovascular occlusion, but the availability of
these tests should not delay thrombolysis.
E. For those patients with acute ischemic stroke for whom
IV or intraarterial thrombolysis can be performed, subsequent care will be dictated by locally developed protocols. For those not receiving thrombolysis, oral or
rectal administration of aspirin is usually appropriate.
Many other IV medications and therapeutic maneuvers
(e.g., desmoteplase, hyperoxia, neuroprotective agents,
induced hypertension) are currently under study. Acute
anticoagulation with heparin is generally limited to patients with critical carotid or basilar artery stenosis, extradural arterial dissection, fluctuating symptoms suggestive of impending thrombosis, or venous occlusion
(discussed later). Heparinoid-like compounds are also
commonly used during the initiation of warfarin treatment for patients with newly diagnosed atrial fibrillation. Acute anticoagulation is relatively contraindicated
following a large stroke (roughly greater than one third
of the middle cerebral artery territory) because of an
increased risk of hemorrhagic conversion.

415
F. Patients with a large stroke (ischemic stroke or intraparenchymal hemorrhage) can develop delayed-onset
brain edema, which can occur several days following the
initial stroke. Repeat CT imaging can help to identify
the onset of edema, and judicious use of medications
(e.g., mannitol, hypertonic saline) can reduce this
edema. Malignant cerebral edema following stroke can
cause herniation of the brain across meningeal planes or
through narrow bony apertures (e.g., the foramen
magnum), resulting in further cerebral injury or death.
Hemicraniectomy—the removal of a large portion of
the skull over one hemisphere, often accompanied by
anterior temporal lobectomy and duraplasty—expands
the cranial vault and can be lifesaving by preventing
fatal herniation.
G. The subacute management and secondary prevention
of ischemic stroke will be influenced by the presenting
stroke’s “mechanism”: cardioembolic (e.g., resulting
from left atrial clot formation in a patient with atrial
fibrillation), large vessel thromboembolism (stenosis;
occlusion; or embolism of a carotid, vertebral, or
basilar artery), lacunar/small vessel disease (resulting
from prolonged hypertension), or cryptogenic. Evaluation of stroke mechanism (with, as indicated, Holter
monitoring, echocardiography, vessel imaging with
CT/MR/Doppler ultrasound/angiography, hypercoagulable workup, etc.) can help guide subsequent therapy.
Rehabilitation therapy can promote increased functional recovery following stroke. Targeted use of antiplatelet agents, anticoagulants, vascular intervention,
blood pressure control, lipid-lowering agents, glucose
control, smoking cessation, and other lifestyle modifications (diet, exercise) can reduce the risk of subsequent stroke.
H. If intracranial hemorrhage is present, the location of
the hemorrhage and its intracranial compartment
(epidural, subdural, subarachnoid, intraparenchymal,
intraventricular) should be defined. For those

patients with hemorrhage, the presence of a coagulopathy or supratherapeutic prothrombin time (PT)
should be excluded by laboratory tests. If the PT/INR
is elevated, both vitamin K (administered intravenously but carries small risk of anaphylaxis) and fresh
frozen plasma should be provided immediately; this
will both help to reduce the risk of the hematoma
expanding and will permit neurosurgical intervention
if indicated. Protamine may be useful for patients
receiving heparinoid-like compounds. Reduction in
blood pressure with IV beta blockers (e.g., labetalol)
or calcium channel blockers (e.g., nicardipine) may
also be needed; nitrates (e.g., nitroprusside, nitroglycerin) should be used only for acute hypertension
that is refractory to other agents because nitrates can
dilate the cerebral vasculature, resulting in a deleterious increase in intracranial pressure.
I. Intraparenchymal hemorrhage may result from acute or
prolonged hypertension, arteriovenous malformations,
an underlying malignancy (primary or metastatic), amyloid angiopathy, or supratherapeutic anticoagulation. In
addition to blood pressure control and reversal of coagulopathy, imaging (CT, MR, or angiography) can clarify
the likely underlying etiology. Neurosurgical consultation is appropriate, although many intraparenchymal
hemorrhages may not warrant surgical intervention.
Another important cause of intraparenchymal hemorrhage is cerebral venous thrombosis (CVT, sometimes
referred to as venous sinus thrombosis). Usually occurring in the setting of dehydration, hypercoagulability,
or the postpartum state, venous occlusion typically
manifests as a headache of gradual onset, sometimes
accompanied by neurologic signs, seizure, or focal
hemorrhage. CVT, even in the setting of secondary
hemorrhage, should be treated with anticoagulation
because the risk of continued venous congestion and
hemorrhage continues until the thrombosed venous
system becomes sufficiently patent.

416
J. Subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) is usually heralded
by the acute onset of the “worst headache of life”
accompanied by nausea, vomiting, transient or continuing loss or depression of consciousness, and possible cranial nerve palsy. SAH most commonly results
from rupture of a cerebral aneurysm of an artery of the
circle of Willis. CT scan will usually reveal diffuse subarachnoid blood; the absence of visible blood on a CT
scan, however, does not fully exclude SAH as an etiology. If the CT scan appears normal in the proper clinical context for SAH (acute-onset worst headache of
life), a lumbar puncture (LP) should be performed.
Four tubes of cerebrospinal fluid should be withdrawn
with no more than 1–2 ml each (an extended microbiology panel is not usually indicated), and tubes 1 and 4
should be clearly labeled and sent for cell count. In
addition, the person performing the LP should note
the presence or absence of xanthochromia (a yellowish
tint, indicating blood products). Comparisons of tubes
1 and 4 will permit distinction of a “traumatic tap”
(a small vessel punctured by the LP needle, more
RBCs in tube 1 than tube 4) versus SAH (no change in
RBC count). Immediate neurosurgical consultation is
indicated for all patients with SAH. Elevated blood
pressure should also be controlled. Definitive management requires surgical or endovascular occlusion of
the aneurysm, followed by intensive care management
of the delayed neurologic, cardiopulmonary, and other
systemic sequelae of SAH.
K. Although not usually categorized under “stroke,” epidural and subdural hemorrhages most commonly result from trauma sufficient to cause skull fracture (e.g.,
being hit by a baseball) and can present as a sudden
posttraumatic loss of consciousness that is sometimes
followed by immediate recovery and then gradual

drowsiness over a period of hours. Subdural hemorrhages result from the tearing of dural bridging veins.
These subdural hemorrhages may be nontraumatic
(spontaneous, particularly in elderly individuals), in
which case they can develop slowly over weeks or
months, or they can be secondary to trauma (e.g., following a fall).
Unlike intracerebral and intraventricular hemorrhages, small, acute epidural and subdural hemorrhages can have a subtle appearance on CT, so care
must be taken to look for them. Neurosurgical consultation should be sought immediately for epidural and
subdural hemorrhages, although small epidural or
chronic subdural hemorrhages may not require surgical management. In cases where surgical management
is not required, close observation and repeated clinical
and radiologic examination of the patient is imperative
so that any early hematoma expansion is noted quickly
and discussed with the neurosurgeon.

References
Broderick JP, Adams HP Jr, Barsan W, et al. Guidelines for the management of spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage: a statement for
healthcare professionals from a special writing group of the Stroke
Council, American Heart Association. Stroke 1999;30(4):905–915.
Coull BM, Williams LS, Goldstein LB, et al. Anticoagulants and antiplatelet agents in acute ischemic stroke. Report of the Joint Stroke
Guideline Development Committee of the American Academy of
Neurology and the American Stroke Association (a division of the
American Heart Association). Neurology 2002;59:13–22.
Hochberg LR, Schwamm LH. Stroke, seizure, and encephalopathy. In
Hurford WE, Bigatello LM, Haspel KL, et al, eds. Critical Care Handbook of the Massachusetts General Hospital, 4th ed. Philadelphia:
Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, 2005.
van Gijn J, Rinkel GJ. Subarachnoid haemorrhage: diagnosis, causes and
management. Brain 2001;124:249–278.

417
Patient with POSSIBLE ACUTE STROKE

A ABCs
B History

C NIHSS

D CT
H Hemorrhage

E F G Ischemic stroke
I Intraparenchymal
hemorrhage
CVT

J SAH

K Epidural/subdural

