ACUTE PULSELESS EXTREMITY

A. In the evaluation of a patient with potential vascular
emergency, the history and physical examination are
extremely important because time of onset and situation leading to the ischemia often influence the type
and urgency of treatment. In the absence of trauma,
acute lower extremity ischemia may occur for myriad
reasons, including myocardial infarction (MI), ventricular aneurysm, valvular heart disease, arrhythmia,
or arterial occlusive disease. It is important to establish
any history of vascular disease, including cardiac, and
whether previous vascular occlusive disease has been
diagnosed or vascular reconstructive operations have
been performed in the past.
B. Abrupt onset of severe unremitting pain is the classic
symptom of acute ischemia, although in patients with a
known history of vascular occlusive disease of the
lower extremities, pain may be less severe if collaterals
have formed. In general, ischemic pain is severe and
requires copious opioid analgesia for even moderate
relief. The classic physical finding is of a cool pale
extremity with absent or extremely weak pulses.
Although pulselessness can often be obvious in its
presentation, patients may present with progressive
symptoms of claudication that has led to acute
ischemia. These patients may present in a quiescent
manner with minimal physical findings. The findings of
paresthesia and paralysis are late findings and usually
predict a poor outcome.
C. The etiology of true acutely absent pulses is usually
trauma, embolism, or thrombosis. In patients with a
history of a revascularization procedure, thrombosis of
the bypass conduit or stent is the most common cause
of acute ischemia.
D. In a patient with acutely absent pulse and the sudden
onset of symptoms, it may be difficult to differentiate
thrombosis from embolism as the cause of the ischemia.
Thrombosis tends to occur more often in younger
patients than in patients with embolism and in patients
with a known history of vascular occlusive disease or
previous vascular surgery. Embolism usually occurs more
commonly in patients with known heart disease (mitral
stenosis or regurgitation, atrial fibrillation, acute MI).
Patients with embolism may have had an earlier embolic
event but usually have no history of chronic circulatory
impairment.

634

E. The hallmark of treatment for limb ischemia is anticoagulation and revascularization. Early anticoagulation
with heparin preserves the patency of needed collateral
blood vessels. The typical adult dose of heparin is an
IV bolus of 10,000 U followed by a minimum dosage
of 1000 U/hr to prolong the activated partial thromboplastin time to !21⁄2 times control.
F. Patients with acute limb ischemia require emergency
evaluation by a vascular surgeon. Many patients will
require emergency angiography to determine the level
of the occlusion and the extent of vascular injury of
disease. The decision to perform angiography should
be done in consultation with a vascular surgeon.
G. If the limb is viable, fibrinolytic therapy may be an
option if thrombosis or embolic disease is suspected.
Although there is no agreed-upon window when intraarterial fibrinolytic therapy is no longer useful, most
authors agree that 12 hours, depending on the size of
the clot and precipitousness of the occlusion, is the
maximum window of opportunity to restore arterial
flow. The catheter is placed directly in the clot by the
radiologist, and a bolus infusion fibrinolytic is given
directly into the clot.
H. If paresthesia or paralysis is present, the limb may
soon become unsalvageable without prompt operative
intervention. It is important to distinguish sensitivity
to light touch from that of pressure, pain, and temperature. Pressure, pain, and temperature sensations
are carried by larger nerves that are more resistant
to ischemia and therefore may remain intact when
sensation to light touch has diminished. After the
abrupt onset of perfusion impairment, the clock begins
ticking. If the collateral circulation is not well developed, one usually has "4–6 hours to restore the circulation. Attempts to provide revascularization after
12 hours are seldom successful.
References
Aufderheide TP. Peripheral arteriovascular disease. In Marx JA,
Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds. Rosen’s Emergency Medicine:
Concepts and Clinical Practice, 5th ed. St. Louis: Mosby, 2002:1187.
Creager MA. Peripheral arterial disease. In Braunwald E, Zipes DP,
Libby P, et al, eds. Braunwald’s Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine, 7th ed. St. Louis: Saunders, 2005:1437.
Lipsitz EC. Antithrombotic therapy in peripheral arterial disease. Clin
Geriatr Med 2006;22(1):183–198.

635
Patient with ACUTE PULSELESS EXTREMITY

A History and

physical examination

B Pulseless extremity
C Traumatic?

No

D Underlying cause?

Yes

(e.g., MI, shock,
venous thromboembolism)

F Immediate emergent
surgical evaluation

No
Acute onset?

No

E History of vascular disease
Document pulses
Consider anticoagulation
Consult vascular surgeon

Yes

G Thrombosis or embolism suspected
Consider angiography
Consider fibrinolytic treatment
along with anticoagulation

H Paresthesia or paralysis present
Prompt operative intervention

