ACUTE VISUAL LOSS

Patients with acute unilateral visual loss require emergent
evaluation. Visual loss occurring over minutes to hours is
usually a result of retinal or optic nerve ischemia. Associated symptoms may help to differentiate among the etiologies, a few of which require emergency treatment to prevent permanent or bilateral visual loss.
A. Acute angle-closure glaucoma is characterized by acute
periocular pain, which may be severe and associated
with nausea and vomiting. Patients experience blurred
vision and colored halos around lights. On examination, the pupil is unreactive and fixed in a mid-dilated
position. The conjunctiva is typically hyperemic, with
corneal edema demonstrated by a dulled reflection of
light from the corneal surface. The intraocular pressure is acutely elevated.
This is a medical emergency that requires prompt
treatment to prevent permanent visual loss. If a TonoPen is available to confirm acutely elevated intraocular
pressure, Timoptic 0.5% 1 gtt and/or Diamox 500 mg
PO/IV should be given. The patient should be
immediately referred to an ophthalmologist for definitive management.
B. Optic neuritis typically causes eye pain, particularly
with extraocular movements. The pupil looks normal,
but further evaluation shows a relative afferent pupillary defect (APD). Visual loss usually occurs over days,
but it may rarely occur over hours. The eye appears
white and quiet. Patients are typically between 18 and
50 years of age. Urgent referral should be made to a
neuro-ophthalmologist or neurologist for neuroimaging
with MRI of the brain and orbits with gadolinium to
assess for demyelinating lesions.
C. Symptoms of giant cell arteritis include jaw claudication, scalp tenderness, headache, malaise, anorexia,
and proximal joint or muscle aches. Patients are typically !50 years of age. Confirmatory labs should be
ordered, with stat ESR, C-reactive protein (CRP),
and CBC with platelets. Immediate methylprednisolone 1–1.5 g IV is given in divided doses to prevent
bilateral visual loss. Emergent ophthalmology evaluation should be sought to evaluate for arteritic anterior
ischemic optic neuropathy or central retinal artery
occlusion. A temporal artery biopsy should be performed within 7 days of starting steroids to confirm
the diagnosis.

474

D. Symptoms of retinal detachment include photopsias
(brief monocular flashes of light), floaters (flies or
cobwebs that move with eye movement), and a curtain
or shadow moving in the field of vision. An urgent
ophthalmology referral should be obtained to evaluate
for retinal detachment or a vitreous hemorrhage, which
is less likely, not urgent, and most commonly seen in
patients with a history of diabetic retinopathy.
E. Central retinal artery occlusion causes sudden,
profound, painless visual loss. On ophthalmoscopy, the
infarcted retina appears whitish and opacified, with a
cherry-red spot in the center of the macula. No ocular
treatment has been proved to be effective, but an
emergent ophthalmology evaluation should be obtained
to confirm the diagnosis. Further management involves
controlling hypertension and other medical problems
and evaluating for carotid or cardiac emboli. In patients
!50 years of age, a stat ESR and CRP should be considered to rule out giant cell arteritis as a potential etiology. Patients "50 years of age may need an evaluation
for collagen vascular disease; hypercoagulable state; or
other rare causes such as syphilis, sickle cell, or Behçet’s
disease.
F. Ophthalmoscopic examination in central retinal vein
occlusion reveals diffuse retinal hemorrhages, dilated
retinal veins, and often cotton-wool spots. Blood pressure should be checked, and hypertension and other
contributors to cardiovascular disease should be managed. If clinically indicated, a hypercoagulable state
should be excluded. An urgent ophthalmology evaluation is obtained to evaluate for elevated intraocular
pressure and future potential neovascularization.
G. Patients with nonarteritic anterior ischemic optic neuropathy are typically !50 years of age and experience painless visual loss over hours to days. An emergent ophthalmology referral should be obtained to
confirm the diagnosis. Management involves controlling cardiovascular disease.
References
Bradford CA, ed. Basic Ophthalmology, 8th ed. San Francisco: American
Academy of Ophthalmology, 2004.
Kaiser PA, Friedman NJ, Pineda R II. The Massachusetts Eye and Ear
Infirmary Illustrated Manual of Ophthalmology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia:
Saunders, 2003.
Trobe JD. The Physician’s Guide to Eye Care, 3rd ed. San Francisco:
American Academy of Ophthalmology, 2006.

475
Patient with ACUTE VISUAL LOSS

Eye pain

Pupil fixed
in mid-dilated
position

A

Acute angleclosure
glaucoma

No eye pain

C

Pupil appears
normal but
APD present

B

Symptoms of
giant cell
arteritis

No symptoms
of giant cell
arteritis

Optic neuritis

D

Retinal detachment
symptoms

No symptoms
of retinal
detachment
Perform
ophthalmoscopy

Retinal
hemorrhages

Retinal edema
with cherryred spot

E

Central retinal
artery occlusion

F

Central retinal
vein occlusion

Swollen
optic disc

G

Nonarteritic
anterior ischemic
optic neuropathy

