ACUTE ABDOMINAL PAIN IN WOMEN

A. The acute abdomen refers to any condition requiring
an “acute” medical decision. The potential causes of
acute abdominal pain in women are multiple. A thorough history can quickly eliminate a number of these.
Information about menstrual cycles, previous episodes
of similar pain, sexual activity, contraception, vaginal
discharge, and changes in bowel, bladder, or appetite
can quickly narrow the differential diagnosis. Findings
in the acute abdomen often include severe pain, which
may be caused by infection, bleeding, infarction of tissue, or obstruction of a hollow viscus (bowel, fallopian
tube, or ureter). Any of these conditions can irritate
and inflame the peritoneum, making it sensitive to
movement. Loss of appetite, nausea, and vomiting often accompany the pain and tenderness. Laboratory
studies necessary for adequately evaluating an acute
abdomen include a CBC with differential, ESR, pregnancy test (urine or serum), urinalysis, and occasionally an amylase or lipase. Obtain cervical cultures for
Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Chlamydia trachomatis at
initial evaluation if the history warrants.
B. If the pregnancy test is positive, the differential diagnosis can be narrowed considerably. It is important
to recognize that conditions other than pregnancy
can be the source of the pain. If gestational age is
!10–12 weeks, consider ectopic pregnancy, rupture
or torsion of ovarian cyst, or septic or threatened
abortion. If gestational age is "12–14 weeks, ectopic
pregnancy becomes less likely; consider other entities, such as ruptured or torsed adnexa, appendicitis,
septic abortion, ureteral colic, and pyelonephritis.
C. Ultrasonography continues to expand its role in the
evaluation of obstetric and gynecologic patients with
abdominal pain. Its use in conjunction with quantitative beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (#-hCG) can
be important. With normal pregnancy, a gestational
sac often is seen at 5–6 weeks of gestation. When the
#-hCG level reaches 6500 mIU/ml, an abdominal
scan can visualize a gestational sac; at 1500 mIU/ml a
transvaginal probe often visualizes the pregnancy. If,
on the basis of sonographic findings and quantitative
#-hCG values, the possibility of an ectopic pregnancy
still exists, the patient needs referral for possible surgi-

590

cal management (laparoscopy/laparotomy) or medical
management (e.g., methotrexate) for an ectopic pregnancy. If an early intrauterine pregnancy is confirmed
by sonography, other sources for the pain must be
determined. Ruptured or torsed ovarian cysts, appendicitis, or an infected abortion also can present with
abdominal pain.
D. If the pregnancy test is negative, history again plays an
important role. Patients with a history of recurrent cyclic pain related to menses and who now have an acute
exacerbation may have a ruptured endometrioma. Patients with a history of fever, chills, and vaginal discharge with a recent change in sexual partners are at
risk for pelvic inflammatory disease (PID). (Patients
taking oral contraceptives are at decreased risk for ovarian cyst formation.) If an infectious cause is determined,
admit the patient for IV antibiotics; if no improvement
is seen in 24–48 hours, consider laparoscopy. CT may
be helpful in the evaluation of the patient because it is
both specific and sensitive for appendicitis. On occasion, however, the determination of PID versus appendicitis often is not resolved until laparoscopy or laparotomy is performed. Other entities that must always
be considered are adnexal torsion, ovarian cyst rupture,
exacerbation of endometriosis, degenerating fibroid,
renal calculi, and mesenteric lymphadenitis.
E. Although many imaging modalities are available to the
practitioner, the choice may need to be made in concert with the radiologist. A thin pregnant patient can
be evaluated well with ultrasound; in obese postmenopausal patients more information may be obtained by
CT. The need for surgical exploration often takes precedence over imaging studies. Many of the disorders
in premenopausal patients apply also to postmenopausal patients. Cyst formation occurs infrequently in
elderly patients, but its appearance must be evaluated
carefully for the possibility of malignancy. Other processes that can cause acute pain include colonic diverticulitis (75% of these resolve with proper attention
and antibiotics), bowel obstruction (most of these
need exploration), and vascular lesions (mesenteric
thrombosis), dissecting or leaking aneurysm, and acute
cholecystitis or pancreatitis.

591
Female Patient with ACUTE ABDOMINAL PAIN

A History

Physical examination

E Postmenopausal

Premenopausal

Consider:
Ultrasonography
CT

Obtain #-hCG

B Positive pregnancy test

Consider:
Colonic diverticulitis
Adhesive disease
and obstruction
Adnexal masses

C Ultrasonography

Intrauterine
pregnancy
visible

No intrauterine
pregnancy visible

Evaluate for
other sources
of pain

Obtain surgical
consultation
Consider:
Laparoscopy
Laparotomy

D Negative pregnancy test

Fever
Increased WBC
count

No fever
Normal WBC
count

Strongly consider
CT scan imaging

No infection
Consider:
Torsed adnexa
Fibroids
Endometriosis

Consider:
PID
Appendicitis
(CT 90% sensitive)

References
Epstein FB. Acute abdominal pain in pregnancy. Emerg Med Clin North
Am 1994;12:151.
Jeffrey RB, Ralls PW. CT and Sonography of the Acute Abdomen, ed 2.
Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1996.

Kiernan GV, Cales RH. Acute abdominal disorders. Emerg Med Clin
North Am 1989;7:30.
Merrell RC. Gastroenterological emergencies. Gastroenterol Clin North
Am 1988;17:75.
Wagner JM, McKinney WP, Carpenter JL. Does this patient have
appendicitis? JAMA 1996;276:1589.

