Acute renal failure (ARF) is defined as a reduction in renal function manifested by an increase in serum creatinine over a period of hours to days. It is often associated with decreased urine output and a failure to excrete nitrogenous waste products and may lead to fluid and electrolyte imbalances. In the absence of a sustained increase, serum creatinine >0.5 mg/dl is a well-established definition of ARF. The causes of ARF may be prerenal (e.g., hypotension, arterial thrombosis), renal parenchymal (e.g., acute tubular necrosis [ATN], glomerulonephritis, tubulointerstitial nephritis), or postrenal (e.g., acute obstruction).

A. The patient with ARF usually presents with abnormal laboratory values, decreased urine output, or both. A thorough history and physical examination are critical in evaluation. Key issues are as follows: (1) ascertaining a history suggestive of bladder outflow obstruction (e.g., secondary to prostatism, such as nocturia, hesitation, and frequency of urination; assessment of any exposures to toxins or nephrotoxic medications, such as exposure to lead or ingestion of NSAIDs; and any systemic symptomatology suggesting an autoimmune etiology, such as arthralgias, arthritis, skin rash); (2) family history of diabetes or kidney disease; and (3) a physical examination focused on assessment of extracellular volume (edema, dry mucous membranes, hypertension, orthostatic hypotension, skin turgor) and detection of systemic process, such as an infection or an autoimmune process.
B. The evaluation of a fresh-voided urine sample for dipstick and microscopy of the urine sediment is essential. The presence of hematuria, proteinuria, or pyuria is important in diagnosis. Careful evaluation of the urinary sediment is key. In a patient with ATN, the presence of tubular cells, amorphous debris representing necrotic cells, and deeply pigmented coarsely granular (“muddy brown”) casts are typical. In glomerulonephritis, the presence of red cells, particularly dysmorphic red cells, and red cell casts are characteristic. In acute tubulointerstitial nephritis, the presence of white cells, tubular epithelial cells, and white cell and/or tubular cell casts is typical. Laboratory testing should also include measurement of urine osmolality; sodium, protein, and creatinine in the urine; and serum osmolality, sodium, glucose, anion gap, albumin, total protein, calcium, BUN, and creatinine. In the workup of a patient suspected of having glomerulonephritis, serologic testing, including measurement of complement fractions, and assays for ANA, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA), and antiglomerular antibody (anti-GBM) should be considered. Early evaluation with a renal ultrasound (US) is essential to exclude urinary obstruction. Severe cases of ATN and some forms of rapid progressive glomerulonephritis (RPGN; e.g., anti-GBM disease) may require a renal biopsy for diagnosis.
C. Prerenal renal failure can result from any condition that leads to decreased renal perfusion, such as intravascular volume depletion (e.g., hemorrhage, GI losses, excessive sweating, third space losses), decreased effective volume (e.g., congestive heart failure), increased renal vascular resistance (e.g., NSAIDs, hepatorenal syndrome), vasoconstrictor drugs (e.g., cyclosporine, radiocontrast), or decreased intraglomerular pressure (e.g., angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors). As proximal tubule function is preserved, the urine osmolality (UOsm) is typically >500 mOsm/kg, urine sodium (UNa) is <20 mEq/L, and the fractional excretion of sodium (FeNa) is <1%. In patients receiving diuretics, a fractional excretion of urea of <35% has been found to be more useful. Prerenal azotemia is reversible within 24-72 hours of correction of the hypoperfused state; however, prolonged hypoperfusion may lead to ischemic ATN, which has a more protracted course to recovery (see later). An otherwise bland urine sediment or hematuria with nondysmorphic RBCs calls for evaluation with imaging studies to exclude obstruction.
D. ATN may result from ischemia, exogenous toxins and nephrotoxic drugs (e.g., aminoglycosides, cisplatin, radiocontrast), or endogenous toxins (hemoglobin, myoglobin, uric acid). Urinary oxalate crystals and an osmolar gap point toward ethylene glycol as the etiology, whereas predominance of uric acid crystals should evoke dedicated laboratory studies for gout and other states with high cell turnover such as hematologic malignancies and tumor lysis syndrome. A dipstick positive for hemoglobin in the absence of RBCs in the urine sediment is indicative of myoglobin or hemoglobin in the urine. Serum studies for creatine kinase (CK), haptoglobin, and the clinical context help to make the diagnosis of rhabdomyolysis. A clinically important issue is the differentiation of prerenal azotemia and ischemic ATN that together underlies 75% of cases with acute kidney injury. ATN is characterized by loss of renal tubule epithelial cell function; therefore, urine osmolality is typically <350 mOsm/kg, urine sodium is >40 mEq/L, and FeNa is >1%. In some nonoliguric forms of ATN, such as after radiocontrast or rhabdomyolysis, the FeNa can initially be <1%. Treatment for ATN is supportive; thus far, no therapeutic intervention has been shown to accelerate recovery from ATN, reduce mortality, or improve the length of stay in the hospital. Renal replacement therapy should be provided in a timely fashion when required by volume status or electrolyte imbalances.
E. Dysuria, flank pain, and fever may be associated with an ascending pyelonephritis. Antibiotics are given according to urine and blood culture results. Urinary tract infections in single kidneys (native or transplanted) are particularly prone to decrease renal function. Drug-induced allergic interstitial nephritis(AIN) resulting from a broad variety of medications may be associated with eosinophilia, fever, and skin rash. However, <10% of patients with AIN present with all three symptoms. Any suspected agent should be discontinued. A renal biopsy is recommended to confirm the diagnosis prior to initiating steroid therapy and to exclude other causes of interstitial nephritis such as the tubulointerstitial nephritis and uveitis (TINU) syndrome or sarcoidosis.
F. Serologic evaluation is usually indicated to diagnose cases of ARF with hematuria, proteinuria, and a sediment that contains dysmorphic RBCs and/or RBC casts. Measurement of a spot urine protein and creatinine is helpful in the differential diagnosis. A urine protein:creatinine ratio >3.5 indicates nephrotic-range proteinuria. If, in addition, the patient has edema and there is a low serum albumin (<3 mg/dl), the patient fits the definition of nephritic syndrome. In this scenario, a renal biopsy can be helpful in establishing the precise diagnosis. In a patient with hypertension and a urine sample that reveals hematuria, proteinuria, and the presence of dysmorphic cells and/or red cell casts, acute nephritis is the most likely diagnosis. A careful clinical evaluation looking for systemic abnormalities and a full serologic evaluation are necessary. Serologic evaluation includes, depending on history and examination, complement levels, ASLO-titer, ANA, ANCA, anti-GBM, hepatitis B and C serologies, cryoglobulins, and syphilis serology. In many instances, a renal biopsy is needed for diagnosis. If signs of systemic vasculitis or pulmonary involvement are present, early intervention with immunosuppressive therapy (IV steroids, cyclophosphamide, plasmapheresis) may be indicated before the results of serologic evaluations are available.

