ADJUVANT THERAPY CHOICES IN BREAST CANCER


Adjuvant systemic treatment refers to chemotherapy, endocrine therapy, or biologic agents given with curative intent
in addition to local treatment for breast cancer (i.e., surgery
with or without radiation). The goal is to eliminate clinically
occult micrometastatic disease that might result in disease
recurrence. Systemic treatment given before definitive surgery, often done in the setting of locally advanced disease, is
termed neoadjuvant therapy.
A. Decision making: The decision to use adjuvant therapy
requir es balancing a patient’s risk of disease recurrence, expected benefits from systemic therapy, and
toxicities associated with treatment. Important
prognostic features include age, medical comorbidities, histologic subtype, tumor size, tumor grade, angiolymphatic invasion, number of lymph nodes involved, and hormone receptor and human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) status. A validated
computer-based algorithm, Adjuvant! Online (www.
adjuvantonline.com), estimates a patient’s 10-year risk
of recurrence and mortality based on these factors
(except HER2) and estimates the impact that adjuvant
treatments will have. Increasingly, oncologists are incorporating information from genomic tests (e.g.,
Oncotype Dx) into prognostication and decision making, particularly for patients with estrogen receptorpositive (ER!) lymph node–negative disease.
B. Chemotherapy: Overall, modern adjuvant chemotherapy
reduces breast cancer mortality by approximately 50% in
women "50 years and 33% in women 50–69 years of
age. Benefits are greatest in patients with estrogen and
progesterone receptor–negative tumors. In the United
States, guidelines suggest consideration of adjuvant chemotherapy for tumors equal to 1 cm or any tumor with
lymph node involvement. Patients’ with high risk features and tumors 0.6–1.0 cm should also consider treatment. Conventional chemotherapy has significant toxicities, however, including alopecia, nausea, bone marrow
suppression, cardiomyopathy, neuropathy, and hypersensitivity reactions. Recent evaluations using genomic testing suggest that some patients may be spared the toxicity
of chemotherapy even when conventional prognostic
factors suggest higher-risk disease.
There are many different regimens to choose from
because no combination of chemotherapy has been
shown to be superior in all situations. In the United
States, anthracycline-containing regimens (doxorubicin
600

and cyclophosphamide, or “AC”-type regimens) have
conventionally formed the backbone of adjuvant treatment. A large meta-analysis showed that these regimens lower the annual odds of recurrence and death
significantly more than cytoxan methotrexate 5-fluoracil
(CMF). The addition of paclitaxel is associated with
a further reduction in the risk of disease recurrence
and death (by 17% and 18%, respectively). Treatment
schedules also matter in this setting; patients following
an AC-type treatment with paclitaxel in a “dose-dense
fashion,” every 2 weeks, have better outcomes than
those treated every 3 weeks. Recent evidence suggests
that docetaxel and cyclophosphamide (or “TC”) chemotherapy is an effective alternative regimen that
avoids the risk of cardiotoxicity associated with anthracyclines.
C. Endocrine therapy: Adjuvant hormonal therapy benefits patients who have hormone receptor–positive
(HR!) tumors, including tumors that are ER! or
progesterone receptor positive (PR!), but not patients
with hormone-resistant tumors. In women with HR!
disease, adjuvant tamoxifen decreases the annual odds
of recurrence and death (by 39% and 31%, respectively) independent of age, menopausal status, lymph
node involvement, or the use of adjuvant chemotherapy. Premenopausal women with HR! breast cancers
should receive tamoxifen for at least 5 years, and ongoing studies are evaluating the risks and benefits of
the addition of ovarian suppression or extended duration of tamoxifen. In recent years, several prospective
randomized trials have shown increased disease-free
survival and lower rates of ipsilateral, contralateral, and
metastatic breast cancer in postmenopausal women
treated with aromatase inhibitors (e.g., letrozole, anastrozole, and exemestane) compared to tamoxifen. Extended treatment with letrozole after 5 years of tamoxifen has also been shown to further improve these
results, but the optimal duration of aromatase inhibitor
treatment and sequence of therapy (i.e., when and
whether to include tamoxifen) is under active investigation. All endocrine therapies are associated with
menopausal symptoms, including hot flashes and night
sweats. Tamoxifen confers an additional increased risk
of uterine cancer and deep venous thrombosis, whereas
aromatase inhibitors are associated with vaginal dryness, musculoskeletal symptoms, osteoporosis, and a
higher risk of bone fracture.
(Continued on page 602)

601
Patient with INVASIVE BREAST CANCER

A Look for higher-risk
anatomic and
histologic features*

Positive

Negative

B Systemic chemotherapy

Cont’d on p 603

generally indicated;
additional therapy based
on biologic features
HER2 status

Positive

D Trastuzumab-based
chemotherapy

Negative
Non–trastuzumabbased chemotherapy

Hormone receptor status

Positive

C If premenopausal

treat with tamoxifen
#ovarian
suppression

Negative
Hormone therapy
not indicated
If postmenopausal
treat with aromatase
inhibitors or tamoxifen
followed by aromatase
inhibitor

*Large tumor, multiple positive lymph nodes, high-grade disease.

602
D. Biologic agents: Nearly one fifth of breast cancers
overexpress HER2, a cell surface tyrosine kinase receptor, which is associated with a poor prognosis unless
treated with trastuzumab, a humanized, monoclonal
antibody. Two parallel trials, analyzed together, showed
a dramatic reduction in disease recurrence and death
(by 52% and 33%, respectively) associated with 1 year
of treatment with trastuzumab following an anthracycline-based chemotherapy regimen. Other trials have
tested trastuzumab in patients treated with a variety of
chemotherapeutic regimens and have confirmed significantly improved disease-free survival. Treatment
with trastuzumab is associated with up to a 4.1% risk of
severe cardiomyopathy, so concurrent treatment with
anthracyclines should be avoided, and patients should
be closely monitored for signs of cardiac dysfunction.
Other novel biologic therapies, including lapatinib and
bevacizumab, are currently under active investigation
in women with early breast cancer.

References
Albain K, Barlow W, Shak S, et al. Prognostic and predictive value of the
21-gene recurrence score assay in postmenopausal, node-positive,
ER-positive breast cancer. [meeting abstract]. San Antonio Breast
Cancer Symposium 2007, abstract 10.
Berry DA, Cirrincione C, Henderson IC, et al. Estrogen-receptor status
and outcomes of modern chemotherapy for patients with node-positive
breast cancer. JAMA 2006;295:1658–1667.
Boccardo F, Rubagotti A, Puntoni M, et al. Switching to anastrazole versus continued tamoxifen treatment of early breast cancer: preliminary
results of the Italian Tamoxifen Anastrozole Trial. J Clin Oncol
2005;23:5138–5147.
Citron ML, Berry DA, Cirrincione C, et al. Randomized trials of
dose-dense versus conventionally scheduled and sequential versus
concurrent combination chemotherapy as postoperative adjuvant
treatment of node-positive primary breast cancer: first report of Intergroup Trial C9741/Cancer and Leukemia Group B Trial 9741. J Clin
Oncol 2003;21:1431–1439.

Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group. Effects of chemotherapy and hormonal therapy for early breast cancer on recurrence
and 15-year survival: an overview of the randomized trials. Lancet
2005;365:1687–1717.
Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group. Polychemotherapy
for early breast cancer: an overview of the randomized trials. Lancet
1998;352:930–942.
Fan C, Oh DS, Wessels L, et al. Concordance among gene-expression
based predictors for breast cancer. N Engl J Med 2006;355:560–569.
Goss PE, Ingle JN, Martino S, et al. A randomized trial of letrozole
in postmenopausal women after five years of tamoxifen therapy for
early-stage breast cancer. N Engl J Med 2003;349:1793–1802.
Henderson IC, Berry DA, Demetri GD, et al. Improved outcomes from
adding sequential paclitaxel but not from escalating doxorubicin dose
in an adjuvant chemotherapy regimen for patients with node-positive
primary breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 2003;21:976–983.
Howell A, Cuzick J, Baum M, et al. Results of the ATAC (Arimidex,
Tamoxifen, Alone or in Combination) trial after completion of 5 years’
adjuvant treatment for breast cancer. Lancet 2005;365:60–62.
Joensuu H, Kellokumpu-Lehtinen PL, Bono P, et al. Adjuvant docetaxel
or vinorelbine with or without trastuzumab for breast cancer. N Engl
J Med 2006; 354(8): 809–820.
Jones SE, Savin MA, Holmes FA, et al. Phase III trial comparing
doxorubicin plus cyclophosphamide with docetaxel plus cyclophosphamide as adjuvant therapy for operable breast cancer. J Clin Oncol
2006;24:5381–5387.
National Comprehensive Cancer Network (www.nccn.org). Outside of
the United States, many physicians follow practice guidelines from the
International Consensus Panel.
Paik S, Shak S, Tang G, et al. A multigene assay to predict recurrence of
tamoxifen-treated, node-negative breast cancer. N Engl J Med
2004;351:2817–2826.
Peto R, for the Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group. The
worldwide overview: new results for systemic adjuvant therapies. San
Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium, plenary lecture one, 12/13/07.
Peto R, Davies C. ATLAS (Adjuvant Tamoxifen, Longer Against Shorter):
international randomized trial of 10 versus 5 years of adjuvant tamoxifen among 11,500 women-preliminary results [meeting abstract]. San
Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium 2007, abstract 48.
Piccart-Gebhart MJ, Procter M, Leyland-Jones B, et al. Trastuzumab
after adjuvant chemotherapy for HER2-positive breast cancer. N Engl
J Med 2005;353:1659–1672.
Romond EH, Perez EA, Bryant J, et al. Trastuzumab plus adjuvant
chemotherapy for operable HER2-positive breast cancer. N Engl
J Med 2005;353:1673–1684.
Thurlimann B, Keshaviah A, Coates AS, et al. A comparison of letrozole
and tamoxifen in postmenopausal women with early breast cancer.
N Engl J Med 2005;353:2747–2757.

603
Patient with INVASIVE BREAST CANCER
(Cont’d from p 601)
Negative
Systemic treatment
based on biologic
features
HER2 status

Positive

Negative

D Consider trastuzumabbased chemotherapy

Consider non–trastuzumabbased chemotherapy,
especially if ER/PR negative

Hormone receptor status

Positive

C If premenopausal

consider tamoxifen
#ovarian
suppression

Negative

If postmenopausal
consider aromatase
inhibitors or tamoxifen
followed by aromatase
inhibitor

Hormone therapy
not indicated

