Adrenal masses are detected in approximately 3% of all abdominal CT scans and in approximately 10% of all autopsies. The discovery of an adrenal mass raises two questions: Is it malignant, and is it functioning?
A. Imaging features can help to determine the malignancy risk. High-risk features include irregular shape, diameter >4 cm, high CT attenuation value (>10 Hounsfield units [HU]), and inhomogeneous enhancement after IV contrast. Metastatic disease from another source tends to cause bilateral disease and have a similar attenuation as the liver on T1 imaging and a high T2-signal intensity.
B. Benign nodules (that may be functional) tend to be round, homogenous, and smaller (<4 cm), with low CT attenuation (<10 HU), and are isointense with the liver on T1- and T2-weighted MRI. Adrenal cysts, myelolipoma, and adrenal hemorrhage are usually readily distinguishable by their unique imaging characteristics. The adrenal cortex can produce a variety of hormones and syndromes, including cortisol (Cushing's syndrome), aldosterone (Conn's syndrome), androgens (virilization), and estrogens (feminization); the adrenal medulla generates catecholamines (pheochromocytoma).
C. Pheochromocytoma can be suggested by the presence of hypertension (can be chronic or paroxysmal), a history of "spells,” headache, palpitations, or pallor. Even in the absence of any symptoms, pheochromocytoma should always be excluded before proceeding to surgery because intraoperative risks of an unrecognized pheochromocytoma are high. Serum metanephrines are specific and sensitive, provided that the patient has not consumed acetaminophen in the prior 72 hours. Two consecutive 24-hour urinary collections for total metanephrines and catecholamines provide confirmatory evidence.
D. Cushing's syndrome can be suggested by the presence of truncal obesity, violaceous striae, proximal muscle weakness, hypertension, and insomnia. An 8-Am cortisol level should be <5 µg/dl after a midnight dose of 1 mg of dexamethasone. Two consecutive cortisol measurements more than three times the upper limit of normal in a 24-hour urinary collection with a creatinine of at least 1 g provide confirmatory evidence.
E. Primary aldosteronism is suggested by refractory hypertension and occasionally hypokalemia. An aldosterone-to-renin ratio >30 when the aldosterone is at least 10 ng/dl is suggestive. To obtain an interpretable result, patients must not be taking aldosterone-receptor antagonists (such as spironolactone or eplerenone) or beta blockers. A suppressed renin in a patient taking an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or angiotensin-receptor blocker is highly suggestive of hyperaldosteronism.
F. Measures of androgens and estrogens are not routinely performed in the absence of suggestive symptoms or signs. Virilization in women is suggested by male-pattern baldness, deepening of the voice, and clitoromegaly. Feminization in men is suggested by gynecomastia, decreased libido, and loss of muscle strength.