ALCOHOLISM

Patients with alcohol problems rarely present with a chief
complaint of problem drinking. More commonly they
exhibit various complications of alcohol abuse. Some are
psychological in nature (fatigue, anxiety, depression, insomnia,
deteriorating relationships, domestic violence, and impaired
work performance); others are somatic (palpitations, weakness, gastric upset, headaches). Emergency department
physicians commonly encounter patients who are acutely
intoxicated and brought in by police because of assaultive
behavior, public intoxication, or driving under the influence
of alcohol (DUI) or driving while intoxicated (DWI). Anxiety
and depressive mood disorders are the most commonly
occurring psychiatric disorders with alcohol dependence.
Alcoholism is the primary diagnosis in 25% of suicides. It is
also a significant contributor to birth defects, including fetal
alcohol syndrome. The physician must maintain a high
index of suspicion to avoid missing this common diagnosis.
Consider alcohol-related problems in nearly every patient.
This includes special populations, such as patients who are
physicians. Nearly every state has distinct programs designed
to guide and monitor recovery.
A. History is the key to a diagnosis of alcohol or drug abuse
or dependence; however, patients often distort the
history and minimize the problem. Denial is a strong
defense in all those who abuse alcohol or drugs. Compounding denial are the recent studies that cite moderate alcohol consumption with decreased risk of heart
disease, myocardial infarction, stroke, and cognitive
decline. Thus, it often is necessary to interview family
members to obtain an accurate drinking history and
symptoms of abuse or dependence. Review patients’
alcohol and drug use history in detail. Look for problems in social (divorce, job loss, family arguments, use in
other family members), legal (DUI, DWI), and medical
(gastritis, peptic ulcer, hepatitis, anemia) areas of the
patient’s life. It is important to identify negative consequences that suggest loss of control and support a diagnosis of dependence. Compulsive use and preoccupation with drinking complete the criteria for dependence
or addiction. The mnemonic CPR (compulsivity, preoccupation, relapse) is useful for recalling the essential
features of dependence. Also review the family history
because alcoholism shows strong family trends. Physiologic dependence often is present but not required for
the diagnosis of alcohol dependence.
B. Physical examination should be detailed and thorough.
Patients with cirrhosis, ascites, edema, rhinophyma,
656

C.

D.

E.

F.

peripheral neuropathy, and jaundice characterize
end-stage alcoholism. These patients usually have been
drinking uncontrollably for !10 years. Physical complications of alcohol are late findings and may not be
evident early in the disease. Increased rates of oral,
pharyngeal, laryngeal, esophageal, and liver cancers
are seen with chronic alcohol use.
Laboratory screening can be informative. Look for
elevations in aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine
aminotransferase (ALT), and gamma glutamyltransferase (GGT). Typically, the AST is greater than the ALT.
The GGT is a more sensitive indicator of alcoholinduced liver damage. The CBC often shows elevated
mean corpuscular volume and mean corpuscular
hemoglobin with prolonged regular use of alcohol.
Hypercholesterolemia and hyperlipidemia often are
present. Blood alcohol level of !300 mg/dl in an alert
patient indicates significant tolerance.
Using the data thus far collected, the physician can usually make a diagnosis of alcohol abuse, dependence, or
polysubstance dependence. The DSM-IV-TR lists the
criteria for substance dependence and substance abuse.
Seven criteria are included for a diagnosis of substance
dependence, three of the seven criteria being required
for a formal diagnosis. In addition, there are the categories of with and without physiologic dependence. There
are also specifiers to further clarify the exact course of
the illness. Four criteria are diagnostic for substance
abuse. Only one of these criteria need be present for
the formal diagnosis.
Dual diagnosis refers to substance abuse or dependence plus another major psychiatric diagnosis such as
depression, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, or anxiety
disorder. These patients can be extremely difficult to
diagnose and treat because substance abuse often
causes or mimics many psychiatric syndromes. Conversely, there is a significant amount of comorbidity
with depressive and anxiety disorders in patients who
are alcohol dependent. Psychiatric consultation is
suggested. Successful treatment of alcohol problems
requires identification and treatment of all other
comorbid psychiatric problems.
Individualize treatment to the particular patient’s
needs. Merely telling the patient to quit drinking is
futile and potentially dangerous. Consultation with an
experienced psychiatrist or addictionist is strongly recommended. Referral to Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) or
another support group is an excellent place to begin

657
Patient with DRINKING PROBLEM

A History
B Physical examination

C Laboratory tests

No serious medical
or surgical condition
present
Patient stable

D Make diagnosis:

Alcohol abuse
Alcohol dependence
Polysubstance
dependence

Admit for stabilization

No other psychiatric
condition present

Other psychiatric
condition present:
Mood disorder
Anxiety disorder
Schizophrenia
Organic mental
disorder

E Dual diagnosis

Serious medical or
surgical condition
present:
Subdural hematoma
Pancreatitis
Hepatic encephalopathy
Delirium tremens
Pneumonia
GI bleeding

F Treatment

Inpatient

Outpatient

AA

G Adjunctive
therapies

Consult or refer
patient to
psychiatrist

but may not be enough for patients with advanced
disease or comorbid psychiatric disorders.
G. The use of pharmacologic agents, such as naltrexone,
acamprosate, and disulfiram, may be useful adjunctive
therapies to decrease craving, prolong sobriety, and
increase time to relapse.

References
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders—Text Revision, 4th ed. Washington, DC: American
Psychiatric Association, 2000.
Berger K, Ajani UA, Kase CS, et al. Light-to-moderate alcohol consumption
and the risk of stroke among U.S. male physicians. N Engl J Med
1999;341:1557–1564.
Hays JT, Spickard WA Jr. Alcoholism: early diagnosis and intervention.
J Gen Intern Med 1987;2:420.
Hines LM, Stampfer MJ, Ma J. Genetic variation in alcohol dehydrogenase
and the beneficial effect of moderate alcohol consumption on myocardial
infarction. N Engl J Med 2001;344:549–555.

Horgan C. Substance abuse: the nation’s number one health problem.
Princeton, NJ: Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, 2001.
Leape LL, Fromson JA. Problem doctors: is there a system-level solution?
Ann Intern Med 2006;144:107–155.
Mason BJ. Treatment of alcohol dependent outpatients with acamprosate:
a clinical review. J Clin Psychiatry 2001;62(Suppl 20):42–48.
Meyers JK, Weissman MM, Tischler GL, et al. Six-month prevalence of
psychiatric disorders in three communities 1980–1982. Arch Gen
Psychiatry 1984;41(10):959–967.
Milhorn JT Jr. The diagnosis of alcoholism. Am Fam Physician
1988;37:175.
Mukamal KJ, Conigrave KM, Mittleman MA, et al. Roles of drinking
pattern and type of alcohol consumed in coronary heart disease in
men. N Engl J Med 2003;348:109–118.
Practice guideline for the treatment of patients with substance use
disorders, ed 2. Am J Psychiatry 2006;163:8.
Ringborg U. Alcohol and risk of cancer. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 1998;
22(7 Suppl):323S–328S.
Schorling JB, Buchsbaum D. Screening for alcohol and drug abuse. Med
Clin North Am 1997;81:845.
Smith DE (special editor). Addiction medicine (special issue). West J
Med 1990;152:502.
Stampfer MJ, Kang JH, Chen J, et al. Effects of moderate alcohol
consumption on cognitive function in women. N Engl J Med 2005;
352:245–253.

