The common signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis include an aura, rhinitis, cough, pruritus, urticaria, laryngeal edema, generalized edema, decreased sensorium, shock, bronchospasm, GI cramps, and vomiting. Rarely, patients may develop heart failure, pulmonary edema, and DIC. Other conditions such as vasovagal reactions, hyperventilation, globus hystericus, and hereditary angioedema may mimic aspects of anaphylaxis and should be ruled out before initiating aggressive therapy.
A. Anaphylaxis is associated with a variety of factors, including foods, drugs, insect bites and stings, latex, semen, and exercise. More than one third of cases have no identifiable cause. Drugs associated with anaphylaxis include β-lactam antibiotics, sulfonamides, anesthetics, chymopapain, protamine, dextran, vaccines, and iodinated radiocontrast media. In any patient with anaphylaxis, obtain a complete exposure history, including any previous reactions.
B. Local reactions usually consist of redness, swelling, and pain at the site of injection. Systemic signs and symptoms may develop rapidly. Measures to slow absorption of the antigen from the injection site, such as application of ice or use of a venous (not arterial) occluding tourniquet, may be useful in the field until the patient reaches medical attention.
C. Base the initial management of anaphylaxis on support of airway, breathing, and circulation. Place all patients in the Trendelenburg position and give supplemental oxygen. In patients with cardiac or respiratory arrest or serious arrhythmias, initiate Basic and Advanced Cardiac Life Support measures.
D. Epinephrine is the mainstay of therapy for anaphylaxis; no other drug has proved as effective. Epinephrine reverses the effects of the mediators of anaphylaxis and may reduce the further release of these mediators. In most adults, give 0.3-0.5 ml of 1:1000 solution by SC injection (in children, 0.01 ml/kg). However, if the patient is in shock, give epinephrine through a central vein or instill into the endotracheal tube. If the desired response is not achieved and no adverse effects occur, repeat epinephrine in 10 minutes. Monitor elderly patients, especially those with underlying cardiac disease, very closely.
E. In patients with severe bronchospasm, epinephrine and inhaled β2 agonists (e.g., albuterol) are the most effective treatment. There is no evidence that IV theophylline is effective in the treatment of acute, severe bronchospasm, and it may increase the risk of cardiac arrhythmias. Early administration of an IV corticosteroid should be considered because these agents have a delayed onset of action. Methylprednisolone at IV dosages of 50–125 mg every 6 hours has been used. In less severe cases, oral prednisone may be appropriate.
F. Antihistamines serve as second-line therapy when a prolonged course is expected. H1 blocking agents such as diphenhydramine or hydroxyzine may be especially useful in treating pruritus. In patients with a prolonged or refractory course, the addition of the H2 blockers, such as ranitidine 50 mg IV or 150 mg PO, may be helpful.
G. Instruct all patients with anaphylaxis in ways to avoid future exposure to the inciting agent. The cause of the episode, if known, should be documented clearly in the patient's medical record, especially in drug-induced anaphylaxis. Because existing therapy with beta blockers or angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors could worsen anaphylaxis, those agents should be discontinued, if possible.
H. In some instances specific preventive therapy may be indicated. Consider patients with bee-sting allergy who cannot easily avoid future exposures for desensitization. In patients with frequently recurrent idiopathic anaphylaxis, prophylactic therapy with corticosteroids and antihistamines has proved effective. Autoinjectors containing epinephrine also may be used by the patient at risk for another serious reaction.