ANEMIA

A. The general evaluation of anemia includes an initial
evaluation of volume status. If clinical signs of intravascular volume depletion such as orthostatic hypotension
are present, RBC and plasma loss may have occurred.
Correct intravascular volume before evaluating the
patient for anemia.
B. Begin evaluation of the pathophysiology of anemia by
assessing effective RBC production. The normal
steady-state reticulocyte production is approximately
50,000/mm3 per day (1% of 5 million), and the maximum production is approximately 400,000/mm3. Under extreme stress, reticulocytes may be released from
the marrow a day early, and even higher levels of
apparent production are achieved. These figures may
be used to interpret whether RBC production is
increased or decreased.
C. Increased RBC production in a patient with anemia is
presumptive evidence of increased RBC destruction
(hemolysis). The hemolysis may be intravascular or predominantly extravascular. In either case, haptoglobin,
the major plasma heme-binding protein, may be depressed. In intravascular hemolysis, free hemoglobin
(Hb) may be present in plasma and iron (Fe) may be in
renal tubule cells (urinary hemosiderin). Indirect bilirubin and lactate dehydrogenase may also be elevated.
The Coombs’ test is used to distinguish immune and
nonimmune hemolysis. A positive, direct Coombs’ test
indicates antibody or complement on the RBC cell

232

surface. Only certain IgG isotypes react with macrophage Fc receptors; therefore, a positive Coombs’ test
may be present without causing increased RBC destruction. Autoimmune antibodies have maximal binding
at either 37° C (warm antibodies, usually IgG) or 4° C
(cold antibodies, usually IgM).
D. If the spleen is palpable and thus clinically enlarged,
hypersplenism cannot be definitively ruled out as a
cause of RBC destruction. This can occur secondary to
processes that themselves lead to anemia, such as the
ineffective erythropoiesis accompanying thalassemia
and hemolysis from an abnormal Hb, such as sickle
cell/C disease.
E. If hypersplenism is unlikely, hemolysis may be a result of
mechanical trauma, congenital enzyme, or Hb defects
within the RBC. Microangiopathic hemolytic anemia
(MAHA) results from RBC trauma from fibrin strands in
small vessels (thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura,
hemolytic uremic syndrome, disseminated intravascular
coagulation [DIC]), or more rarely, prosthetic heart
valves. Enzymatic defects can be drug dependent, such
as G6PD deficiency, or constitutive, such as pyruvate
kinase deficiency. Abnormal Hbs (sickle hemoglobin)
and membrane defects (hereditary spherocytosis) also
cause hemolysis. Acquired causes of hemolysis include
the excess complement sensitivity acquired in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) and infections
such as malaria.
(Continued on page 234)

233
Patient with ANEMIA (DECREASED RBC MASS)
Volume depleted
(blood loss)

A

Transfusion
Normovolemic

B Reticulocytes

Reticulocytes
decreased

increased

C Coombs’ test positive

Coombs’ test negative

D Spleen palpable

Warm Ab

Cold Ab

Consider:
Autoimmune
hemolytic
anemia
Drug-induced
AIHA

Consider:
Primary cold
agglutinin
PCH
Secondary cold
agglutinin
(mycoplasma,
virus)

Normal spleen

Consider:
Hypersplenism
Thalassemia
Congenital
Abnormal
hemoglobin
(e.g., HbSC)

Cont’d on p 235

Acquired

Consider:
Consider:
Drug related
MAHA
(G6PD deficiency) DIC
Enzyme defect
PNH
Membrane defect
Malaria
(spherocytosis)
Abnormal hemoglobin
(e.g., HbSS)

234
F. When RBC production is decreased or normal in the
face of anemia (normal production with a reduced RBC
mass constitutes depressed production), guidance as to
the origin of the anemia may be provided by RBC size
obtained through automated cell counting. Microcytic
anemias generally involve processes in which Hb or
heme synthesis is impaired. Thalassemia minor is a
common cause of microcytic anemia. Major thalassemias cause more severe anemia and often are accompanied by organomegaly and/or skeletal abnormalities
caused by marrow expansion. Anemia of chronic disease
is the most common anemia in hospitalized patients; can
be mildly microcytic (mean cell volume !75); and
shows reduced serum Fe, reduced total iron-binding
capacity (TIBC), and increased serum ferritin. In contrast, Fe deficiency is the most common outpatient
anemia and is characterized by reduced serum Fe,
increased TIBC, and reduced serum ferritin.
G. In normocytic anemias, consider anemia of chronic
disease in appropriate clinical settings when the aforementioned laboratory findings are present. If anemia of
chronic disease is absent, order a bone marrow aspiration and biopsy to rule out a marrow defect in RBC
production resulting from aplasia, processes replacing
the marrow (myelophthisic anemia), lymphoproliferative or myeloproliferative disorders, or malnutrition.
Protein calorie malnutrition causes anemia in disorders
such as anorexia nervosa. Other metabolic disorders also
cause severe anemia, including uremia. The primary
defect in patients with uremia is a relative lack of the
erythroid-stimulating hormone erythropoietin (EPO),
which may now be substantially corrected by EPO administration. The Fe status of these patients depends on
their transfusion and medication histories.

H. Macrocytic anemias result from either vitamin deficiencies or primary processes involving the marrow. Liver
disease also can cause macrocytosis because of excess
RBC membrane lipid, but it is not associated with vitamin deficiency. Vitamin B12 deficiency may be a result of
pernicious anemia or secondary to other causes of B12
malabsorption, but it is almost never a result of dietary
deficiency. In recent years, many early cases of B12 deficiency have been detected by serum B12 assays and
confirmatory tests (increased serum methylmalonic acid
or homocysteine). Folate deficiency usually is a result of
dietary deficiency or diet in combination with ethanol
ingestion. Some drugs also impair folate absorption
(phenytoin) or metabolism (trimethoprim).
I. When folate and B12 levels are normal, macrocytic
anemias often result from myelodysplasia or unusual
congenital dyserythropoietic anemias (types 1, 2, or 3)
diagnosed by bone marrow examination.
References
Dallman PR. Biochemical basis for the manifestations of iron deficiency.
Ann Rev Nutr 1986;6:13.
Doll DC, Weiss RB. Neoplasia and the erythron. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:429.
Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Ali M, et al. Tests for determination of irondeficiency anemia: a meta-analysis. Laboratory diagnosis of irondeficiency anemia: an overview. J Gen Intern Med 1992;7:145.
Saxena S, Rabinowitz AP, Johnson C, et al. Iron-deficiency anemia:
a medically treatable chronic anemia as a model for transfusion
overuse. Am J Med 1993;94:120.
Sears DA. Anemia of chronic disease. Med Clin North Am 1992;76:567.
Thompson CE, Damon LE, Ries CA, et al. Thrombotic microangiopathies
in the 1980s: clinical features, response to treatment, and the impact of
the human immunodeficiency virus epidemic. Blood 1992;80:1890.
Van Wyck DB. Iron management during recombinant human erythropoietin
therapy. Am J Kidney Dis 1989;14:9.
Yip R, Dallman PR. The roles of inflammation and iron deficiency as
causes of anemia. Am J Clin Nutr 1988;48:1295.

235
Reticulocytes decreased
(Cont’d from p 233)

F Microcytic RBC

Reduced Fe,
Normal Fe, Reduced
reduced or Fe and TIBC increased TIBC
normal
TIBC
Consider:
Consider:
Anemia of
Fe deficiency
chronic
disease
Consider:
Lead poisoning
Thalassemia
minor

Hypoplasia
Consider:
Aplastic
anemia

Normocytic RBC

G Normal

Fe, TIBC

Reduced
Fe, TIBC

Bone Marrow
Aspiration and
Biopsy

Consider:
Anemia of
chronic
disease

Myelophthisic

Macrocytic RBC

H Normal vitamin
B12 and folate

Bone Marrow
Aspiration and
Biopsy

Reduced
vitamin B12

Reduced folate

Consider:
Drug induced
Consider:
Ethanol
Pernicious
Dietary
anemia
Ileal surgery
Malabsorption
Bile salt
deconjugation

Other

Consider:
Consider:
Leukemia
Starvation
Solid tumors
Uremia
Myelodysplasia
Myeloproliferative
syndromes

I

Acquired

Congenital

Consider:
Myelodysplasia

Consider:
Dyserythropoietic
anemia

