ANOREXIA

A. Anorexia (loss of appetite) often is clinically difficult to
differentiate from weight loss without an effect of appetite. However, the diagnostic considerations and
workup usually are the same for both clinical problems. Perform a careful history and physical examination, including medication history, social history, and
psychological screening examination. The causes of
anorexia and weight loss may be divided into five major
groups: (1) medical conditions, (2) psychological conditions, (3) social factors, (4) age-related factors, and
(5) anorexia nervosa and related eating disorders.
B. A medication and treatment profile on patients with
anorexia is of utmost importance because it can identify
an easily treated cause. The medications listed are commonly associated with anorexia, especially in elderly
patients. Therapeutic measures such as radiotherapy
(RT) to the mouth or neck region can alter taste and
smell and depress appetite.
C. Perform a head CT or MRI scan in patients who have
anorexia with suspected CNS disease. Symptoms of visual disturbance, headaches, or signs of increased intracranial pressure (e.g., papilledema or cranial nerve involvement) should alert one to a potential CNS cause.
Consider CNS tumors, especially hypothalamic tumors.
D. Several GI disorders can cause anorexia and/or weight
loss. Malabsorption syndromes can mimic eating disorders (e.g., parasitic diseases, inflammatory bowel disease, celiac sprue, pancreatic insufficiency). Laboratory
findings that can help differentiate organic disease from
eating disorders are leukocytosis, steatorrhea, fever,
hematochezia, and histologic or radiographic findings
typical of certain GI disease states. Malignancy involving the GI tract can cause weight loss by several mechanisms: oral cavity pain or swallowing difficulty, esophageal obstruction or motility problems, gastric outlet
obstruction, bowel obstruction, biliary disease, pancreatitis, mesenteric ischemia, and abdominal pain. Distant metastases of GI malignancies also can produce
anorexia or weight loss by several mechanisms.
E. Social and cultural factors play an important role in
the attitudes and behaviors of eating and body image. These factors are important components in the

176

complex etiology of eating disorders. Other factors,
such as difficulty with food acquisition and social
isolation, can be important in some patients, especially the elderly.
F. Dementia and depression may cause significant weight
loss. These are more commonly seen in the elderly and
are important considerations because these disorders
are potentially treatable. All cases of depression should
be treated and reversible causes for dementia should
be sought. Alcoholism is a common cause of anorexia
and weight loss. Obtain a careful alcohol and drug
abuse history in all cases.
G. Normal physiologic changes in the elderly may cause
anorexia and weight loss. Hypogeusia (diminished
sense of taste) and decreased olfactory function may
result in food being less desirable. Visual and hearing
problems may interfere with the usual mealtime socialization and may cause social isolation. Visual disorders
and other physical disabilities may interfere with food
preparation.
H. Anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa are eating disorders that affect 1%–4% of women and are rarely found
in men. These disorders usually are diagnosed in the
second or third decades, but reports of diagnosis in
older persons are increasing. Anorexia nervosa and
bulimia nervosa result from complex interactions of
physiologic, psychological, and sociocultural dysfunction. Diagnostic criteria for these eating disorders used
by most authors are those found in the DSM-IV of the
American Psychiatric Association. Patient history reveals intense fear of fatness, disturbed perception of
body image, and an obsessional desire to lose weight.
Patients with bulimia nervosa classically have binge
eating commonly associated with self-induced vomiting, abuse of cathartics or diuretics, and fear of loss of
control over eating. Treatment of these disorders is
complex and should follow a team approach, with a
primary care physician managing medical care and
coordinating treatment by psychiatric/psychological
and nutritional consultants. Many medical complications may result from eating disorders; treatment of
these should have priority.

177
Patient with ANOREXIA

A History

Diagnostic tests:
Chemistry panel
CBC
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
Urinalysis
Thryroid function tests
Fasting plasma cortisol level
ECG

Physical examination

Medical disease

Nonmedical cause

E Social factors

F Psychological
disorders

Consider:
Depression
Dementia
Alcoholism
Drug abuse
Psychosis
Anxiety
Bereavement

B Medications
Consider:
Sedatives and
psychotropics
Digoxin
Laxatives
Appetite
suppressants
Thiazide
diuretics
Levodopa
Narcotics
Antibiotics

C CNS

disease

H Eating disorders
G Age-related
conditions

Consider:
Decreased olfactory sense
Hypogeusia
Visual disorders
Hearing disorders
Dental disorders

D GI disorders

Endocrine
disorders

Consider:
Thyroid disease
Adrenal insufficiency
Diabetes
Hyperparathyroidism
Hypercalcemia

Other medical
diseases

Consider:
Consider:
Malabsorption
Chronic
syndromes
infection
Peptic ulcer disease
Malignancy
Biliary disease
Cardiopulmonary
Hepatitis
disease
Gastroesophageal
Cerebrovascular
reflux disease
disease
Esophageal
Abdominal
motility disease
ischemia
Oral cavity problems
GI malignancy
Mesenteric ischemia
Diagnostic tests:
Stool for blood,
fat, parasites
Upper GI with
small bowel
follow-through
Consider:
ABD/pelvic
CT scan

References
Comerci GD. Medical complications of anorexia nervosa and bulimia
nervosa. Med Clin North Am 1990;74:1293.
Denke MA. Anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and obesity. In Sleisenger
MH, Foldman M, Freidman LS, eds. Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease, 7th ed, Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2002:310.

Morley JE. Anorexia in older patients: its meaning and management
Geriatrics 1990;45:59.
Olsen-Noll EG, Bosworth MF. Anorexia and weight loss in the elderly.
Postgrad Med 1989;15:140.
Rabinovitz M, Pitlik SD, Leifen M, et al. Unintentional weight loss. A
retrospective analysis of 154 cases. Arch Intern Med 1986;46:186.

