ANORECTAL PAIN


A. Anorectal pain has several potential causes, including
local and nonlocal disease processes. A careful history
and physical examination, including neurologic, anoscopic, and pelvic examinations, are important in the
search for a cause, which may range from an easily
treated condition to a life-threatening one. Important
considerations in the history are associated symptoms
and reported signs (e.g., fever, rectal bleeding, vaginal
discharge, hematuria, neurologic dysfunction). Also
note rapid onset of symptoms, sexual practices, and
any history of inflammatory bowel disease.
B. Careful inspection, along with digital and anoscopic
examinations, reveals most local causes of anorectal
pain, but further evaluation with proctosigmoidoscopy
may be necessary. This also provides a means for obtaining biopsy specimens for culture and histology.
Rectal bleeding, mucus discharge, diarrhea, and anorectal pain suggest proctitis from infection or other
inflammatory causes.
C. A pelvic examination and consideration of pelvic ultrasonography or CT scan are important in the diagnosis
of conditions that may cause referred pain to the anus
and rectum. Most of these conditions have a common
pathway of irritation of the pudendal nerves that supply sensory innervation to the anus and rectum. Cervical and vaginal cultures and urinalysis with culture
are necessary when considering pelvic inflammatory
disease, prostatitis, or nephrolithiasis. Consider CTpyelography if the clinical picture is otherwise consistent with nephrolithiasis.
D. The diagnosis of proctalgia fugax rests on the history
and the exclusion of other pelvic or anorectal abnormality. It is a benign condition of unknown cause characterized by paroxysmal anorectal pain of varying severity and sudden onset. Coccygodynia consists of
throbbing or aching pain in the coccygeal region. Organic causes include fracture of the coccyx and traumatic arthritis of the sacrococcygeal joint. A functional
coccygodynia also exists. Coccygeal tenderness associated with spasm of surrounding muscles is a common
finding on physical examination. Tension myalgia of
the pelvic floor describes a syndrome of chronic vague
discomfort in the rectum, pelvis, or lower back in patients without any other definable cause of pain. Pain
typically is constant. Some authorities believe that the

214

E.

F.

G.

H.

I.

pain may be related to poor posture, generalized deconditioning, and possible psychological disorders.
Chronic idiopathic anal pain has features that overlap
with the other chronic pain syndromes.
There are several neurologic causes of anorectal pain.
Associated neurologic signs and symptoms, pain characteristics, onset of pain, and spinal pathology are important factors in considering a neurologic cause for
rectal pain. After a careful neurologic examination the
procedures listed will be helpful in diagnosis of a specific neurologic disorder. Formal neurology consultation is recommended.
Pain may originate in sacral spinal cord segments or
sacral nerve roots. Neoplasm, abscess, or inflammatory
processes of the conus medullaris may present with
pain. Associated loss of bowel or bladder function often occurs.
Entrapment of the sacral nerve roots of the cauda
equina may occur secondary to inflammatory reactions
in the cerebrospinal fluid or they may be compressed
by tumor, abscess, or lumbosacral disc herniation.
The sacral plexus is located against the posterior pelvic wall. The plexus may be compressed by tumor or
enlarged lymph nodes. Consider CT or MRI of the
sacral spine and pelvis.
Spinal subarachnoid hemorrhage is a rare cause of
rectal pain. This is most commonly the result of vascular malformation rupture, but it may also be associated
with trauma, anticoagulant therapy, blood dyscrasias,
or tumor. Ependymoma is the most common tumor
associated with spinal subarachnoid hemorrhage. In
patients with sudden onset of rectal pain associated
with back pain, headache, stiff neck, and fever, consider spinal subarachnoid hemorrhage.

References
Harper MB, Pope JB. Office procedures: flexible sigmoidoscopy. Prim
Care 1997;24:341.
Hull T. Examination and diseases of the anorectum. In Feldman M,
Friedman LS, Sleisenger MH, eds. Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease, 7th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2002:2277.
Lieberman DA. Common anorectal disorders. Ann Intern Med
1984;101:837.
Peery WH. Proctalgia fugax: a clinical enigma. South Med J 1988;81:621.
Rappaport B, Emsellem HA, Shesser R, Millstein E. An unusual case of
proctalgia. Ann Emerg Med 1990;19:201.

215
Patient with ANORECTAL PAIN

A History

Physical examination

B Local causes

Nonlocal causes
Pelvic examination
Consider:
Pelvic ultrasonography
CT
Cervical and vaginal
cultures
Urinalysis with culture
Consider:
IV pyelography

Digital/Anoscopic
Examination
with or without
Proctosigmoidoscopy
Consider:
Thrombosed or infected
hemorrhoids
Anal fissures
Anorectal abscess
Anal fistulas
Infectious or inflammatory
proctitis
Fecal impaction
Anal foreign bodies
Neoplasm

F Sacral spinal cord

segment or nerve roots

C Referred pain
Consider:
Pelvic inflammatory
disease
Prostatitis
Colonic endometriosis
Nephrolithiasis

G Cauda equina
entrapment

D Unclear etiology
Consider:
Proctalgia fugax
Coccygodynia
Tension myalgia
Chronic idiopathic
anal pain

H Sacral plexus
impingement

E Neurologic
Diagnostic tests:
Lumbar puncture
Myelography
CT
MRI

I Spinal subarachnoid
hemorrhage

