ANXIETY


A. Everyday stressors such as illness, injury, and loss can
produce anxiety in patients and their families. Compassion, patience, and understanding can reduce feelings of
helplessness and social isolation and increase patients’
confidence and self-esteem. A benzodiazepine may be
prescribed if patients understand that it is a temporary
measure of no more than a few days’ or weeks’ duration
and if they have no history of a psychoactive substance
use disorder.
B. Organic factors can produce symptoms of anxiety. They
include cardiovasculature (e.g., hypertension, arrhythmias), dietary (e.g., caffeine), physiologic or iatrogenicinduced delirium, substance related (e.g., cocaine, drug
withdrawal syndromes, stimulants, bronchodilators),
hematologic (e.g., anemias), immunologic (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus), metabolic (e.g., hyperadrenalism, hyperthyroidism/hypothyroidism, menopause),
neurologic (e.g., encephalopathies, intracranial mass
lesions, seizure disorders), respiratory (e.g., asthma,
pneumonia, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease),
and secreting tumors (e.g., carcinoid, pheochromocytoma). In addition, patients may often experience anxiety during the initial stages of dementia (these patients
may have a paradoxical response to sedative-hypnotics
with increased anxiety and memory impairment).
Therefore, it is critical to diagnose or rule out an organic etiology to the symptoms of anxiety. However, the
presence of a nonpsychiatric medical disorder does not
always exclude the possibility of a concurrent anxiety
disorder.
C. Anxiety is a feature of many psychiatric disorders. These
include, but are not limited to, attention-deficit and
disruptive behavior disorders, childhood or adolescent
separation anxiety, schizophrenia and other psychotic
disorders, mood disorders (e.g., depression and bipolar
disorders), and adjustment disorders. Diagnose and
treat the underlying problem.
D. In addition to generalized anxiety disorder, the
DSM-IV-TR identifies other anxiety disorders including panic, phobic, obsessive, acute, and posttraumatic
stress disorders.
Panic disorder is characterized by frequent panic
attacks, at least some of which occur at unexpected
times. Panic attacks are sudden episodes of severe apprehension or fear associated with at least four
of the following symptoms: choking sensations, shortness of breath or smothering sensations, palpitations
or tachycardia, chest discomfort, dizziness, trembling
or shaking, numbness or tingling, hot flashes or chills,
658

sweating, nausea or abdominal distress, feelings of
unreality, a fear of dying, and a fear of going crazy or
losing control. Look for abrupt onset (maximal intensity within 10 minutes of onset) and short duration
(typically, 2–30 minutes). Many patients see cardiologists or emergency physicians seeking a medical explanation of the problem. Indeed, they account for
!30% of patients with atypical or nonanginal chest
pain. Compared to controls, patients diagnosed with
panic disorder may have a higher prevalence of asthma,
labile hypertension, mitral valve prolapse, and migraine headaches. Several medications can block anxiety attacks. These include selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (SSRIs), such as paroxetine, and tricyclic
antidepressants, such as imipramine (start low, go
slow, warn the patient of an exacerbation in symptoms
early in treatment); monoamine oxidase inhibitors
(MAOIs), such as phenelzine (provide a list of dietary
and medication restrictions); and benzodiazepines,
such as clonazepam or lorazepam (use standing doses
to prevent attacks, warn patients about withdrawal
symptoms and the related need for slow discontinuation, and avoid in patients with a history of a psychoactive substance use disorder). Recent evidence suggests
that cognitive-behavioral therapy can prevent anxiety
attacks as effectively as medication in patients with
panic disorder. This standardized, short-term treatment should be administered by a well-trained professional; it is designed to help patients identify and revise the habit of responding to normally innocuous
physical sensations as dangerous. Once the panic
attacks are addressed, patients who have panic disorder with agoraphobia are encouraged to confront and
learn to overcome their fears through repeated, frequent, intense exposures to the feared situations.
E. Phobias, irrational fears that are recognized by the
individual as excessive, are extremely common. Agoraphobia is an irrational fear of situations from which it
may be difficult or embarrassing to escape. Always
consider the possibility of panic attacks in patients with
this disorder. Social phobia is an excessive fear of being
scrutinized in performance or social situations. Distinguish individuals who have the circumscribed type
of social phobia (those who fear one particular performance situation, such as public speaking) from those
who have generalized social phobia (excessively
shy individuals who fear a variety of performance
and social situations). Specific phobia is an irrational
fear of particular objects or situations (e.g., animals,
(Continued on page 660)

659
Patient with ANXIETY

B Organic factor

A Recent stressor
Consider:
Situational anxiety
Adjustment disorder
Supportive Therapy
"
Short-Term Benzodiazepine

C Other psychiatric
disorders

Consider:
Cognitive disturbance
Treat
Delirium
Underlying
Dementia
Disorder
Other neurologic disorders
Temporal lobe epilepsy
Vertigo
Endocrine disorders
Hyperthyroidism
Hypothyroidism
Hypoparathyroidism
Hypercortisolism
Pheochromocytoma
Insulin-induced hypoglycemia
Drugs
Caffeine
Stimulants
Drug discontinuation
Alcohol withdrawal
Sedative-hypnotic withdrawal
Other
Other temporally related disorders
Other temporally related drugs
Withdrawal from other drugs

Anxiety disorder

Consider:

Treat Underlying Disorder

D Recurrent panic attacks

E Excessive fear of

Obsessions/
compulsions,
catastrophic stressor,
or generalized anxiety

specific situations

Panic disorder
With
agoraphobia

Specific
phobia
Without
agoraphobia

Block anxiety
attacks first,
then treat
agoraphobia:
In vivo exposure
therapy
Consider support
group
Block Anxiety Attacks:
Antidepressants
MAOIs
High-Potency
Benzodiazepines
or
Cognitive-Behavioral
Therapy

Agoraphobia
without
panic
disorder

Social
phobia

Circumscribed
Rule out
panic disorder

Exposure Therapy
"
Adjunctive
Benzodiazepine

Exposure Therapy
"
Adjunctive
Benzodiazepine
or
Beta Blocker

Cont’d on p 661

Generalized
SSRI
MAOI

or
CognitiveBehavioral
Group Therapy

660
enclosed places, heights). Exposure therapy encourages patients to gradually confront and learn to overcome the feared object, activity, or situation; frequency,
duration, and intensity of exposures are directly related
to outcome. Prescribe a benzodiazepine if patients
understand that it is a temporary measure and if there
is no history of a psychoactive substance use disorder.
Circumscribed social phobia may respond to adjunctive use of a beta blocker or a benzodiazepine. Beta
blockers can be administered prophylactically minutes
before exposure to a perceived noxious stimuli, such
as a public speaking engagement, and may be less
sedating than benzodiazepines. However, when taken
regularly this class of drug may induce depression. The
best established treatments for the generalized type of
social phobia include SSRIs, MAOIs, standing doses of
the high-potency benzodiazepine clonazepam, and
cognitive-behavioral group therapy.
F. Obsessions are recurrent, intrusive, unwanted ideas
that insistently enter the mind; they are distressing and
typically recognized as senseless by the individual. Compulsions are repetitive, ritualistic behaviors typically
performed to neutralize an obsession and reduce
distress; most of these individuals recognize that their
behaviors are unreasonable and excessive. The YaleBrown Obsessive Compulsive Scale Symptom Checklist
may help identify additional obsessions and compulsions
in these patients. Many patients benefit from a trial of
an SSRI or the non-SSRI clomipramine (often at higher
dosages than that used to treat other disorders); behavioral therapy (e.g., a structured, short-term protocol that
involves repeated exposure to the obsession-eliciting
situation together with a mandate to suppress anxietyreducing compulsions); or a combination of the two.
Some patients benefit from participation in a support
group. Rarely, stereotactic surgery may be considered.
Bilateral anterior cingulotomy is performed in patients
with extremely disabling symptoms that are unresponsive to the arsenal of more conventional treatments.
G. Consider acute stress disorder (lasting #1 month)
or posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD; lasting
!1 month) in individuals who have been exposed to
traumatic events associated with a threat of injury or
death to self or others and feelings of intense fear,
helplessness, or horror (e.g., rape, accidental or natural
disasters, military combat). Symptoms include reexperiences of the traumatic event (e.g., recurrent thoughts,

nightmares, flashbacks, and distress in response to reminders of the event); avoidance behaviors (e.g., avoidance of thoughts, feelings, or situations associated with
the event); restrictions in emotion and interpersonal
relationships; and increased arousal (e.g., insomnia,
irritability, or hypervigilance). These patients may also
manifest profound feelings of guilt associated with
having survived a trauma when others may have
perished. Consider individual or group psychotherapy
to increase self-esteem, decrease social isolation, and
support coping resources; SSRIs, other antidepressants of PTSD or MAOIs to reduce symptoms or associated depression; and referral for participation in a
structured program of behavioral therapy, one that involves frequent imagined exposures to the stressor.
H. Generalized anxiety disorder is a diagnosis of exclusion. Ask, “Have you worried excessively about everyday matters (e.g., work, school, family, and finances)
most of the day more days than not for at least
6 months?” Consider the other disorders in the decision tree (e.g., panic disorder, major depression) first.
Consider an antidepressant such as venlafaxine or
imipramine first and the nonbenzodiazepine anxiolytic
buspirone second; use benzodiazepines sparingly,
especially in patients who are elderly or with cognitive
impairment or a psychoactive substance use disorder;
and discontinue medications that fail to work.
Although nonmedication treatments do not yet have
established value, interventions are being studied that
target the hallmark feature of worry.

References
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorders, 4th ed. Text Revision. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association, 2000.
Barlow DH. Anxiety and Its Disorders: The Nature and Treatment of
Anxiety and Panic. New York: Guilford Press, 1988.
Davies SJ, Ghahramani P, Jackson PR, et al. Association of panic disorder
and panic attacks with hypertension. Am J Med 1999;107:310.
Hyman SE, Arana GW. Handbook of Psychiatric Drug Therapy, 3rd ed.
Boston: Little, Brown, 1995.
Reiman EM. Anxiety. In Gelenberg AJ, Bassuk EL, eds. Practitioner’s
Guide to Psychoactive Drugs, 4th ed. New York: Plenum, 1997.
Rosenbaum JF. The drug treatment of anxiety. N Engl J Med
1982;306:401–404.
Roth WT, Yalom D. Treating Anxiety Disorders. Boston: Jossey-Bass, 1996.
Zaubler TS, Katon W. Panic disorder and medical comorbidity: a review
of the medical and psychiatric literature. Bull Menninger Clin
1996;60(2):A13.

661
Patient with ANXIETY
(Cont’d from p 659)

F Obsessions,

compulsions
Obsessivecompulsive
disorder

SSRI

or
Exposure with
Response
Prevention
Consider Support
Group

G Catastrophic
stressor

Acute or
posttraumatic
stress disorder
Consider:
Antidepressant
MAOI
Imaginal
exposure
therapy
Supportive
therapy
Support group

H Excessive

worry !6 mo
unrelated
to another
disorder
Generalized
anxiety
disorder

Consider:
Antidepressant
Buspirone
Benzodiazepine
Supportive therapy
Cognitive-behavioral
therapy

