APPROACH TO THE NEWLY DIAGNOSED
HIV-POSITIVE PATIENT
Since the beginning of the AIDS epidemic in the
United States approximately 1.6 million patients have been
diagnosed with HIV. For over a decade the number of
new infections reported annually has remained stable at
40,000 per year. However, the incidence of infection has
risen in certain populations, including men who have sex
with men, Blacks, Hispanics, and women. Health care
practitioners must remain acutely aware of the possibility
of new HIV infection and take steps to counsel and test
their patients appropriately.
A. Pretest and posttest counseling are critical steps in
the evaluation for HIV infection. Pretest counseling
should include a description of the blood test, limitations of the test, discussion of high-risk behaviors,
risk-reduction counseling, differences between HIV
and AIDS, implications of a positive test, and available interventions and treatments. When a test result
is obtained, counseling should continue. If the patient’s test is positive, then issues such as stigma and
disclosure should be discussed. Patients should be
advised to inform previous sexual partners of their
HIV status. Counseling must also include discussion
of adherence to safe sexual practices, use of condoms,
avoidance of drugs that disinhibit behavior, and arrangements for follow-up medical care. Patients
should also be referred to community resources for
supportive counseling.
B. Diagnosis of chronic HIV infection should be made
using standard enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) tests. If a patient has HIV infection and is
beyond the “window period” (the time after infection
has occurred but before evidence of HIV infection is
detectable—approximately 6 weeks), then the ELISA
test should be obtained. The sensitivity and specificity
of this test are estimated to be !98%. If the test is
positive, it should be confirmed with a Western Blot,
which detects the presence of serologic reactivity to
individual viral antigens. The specificity of this test is
!99%. Rapid HIV antibody testing has also been
approved by the FDA. Confirmatory Western blot testing is still required when rapid-testing kits are used.
C. A detailed history should be obtained. Approximate
time and source of infection should be obtained. Par-

318

ticular focus should be placed on risk of co-infection
with hepatitis B or C; current sexual activity; substance
abuse history; diagnosis and treatment of sexually transmitted diseases (STDs); past medical history of opportunistic infections, including tuberculosis and purified
protein derivative (PPD) status; current medications,
including herbal supplements; family history of cardiovascular disease and diabetes; most recent Pap smear
results (for women); and history of immunizations. Past
history of travel to areas endemic for histoplasmosis and
coccidiomycosis may also be relevant.
D. An HIV-focused review of systems is critical. Review of
systems should include fatigue, weight loss, anorexia,
depression, fever, chills, night sweats, adenopathy, skin
rash or bruising, headaches, sinus or ear pain, visual
changes, oral sores, odynophagia, dysphagia, shortness
of breath, dyspnea on exertion, cough, abdominal pain,
diarrhea, genital-rectal sores or pain, arthritis, muscle
weakness, forgetfulness, and lack of coordination.
E. A complete physical examination for the newly diagnosed HIV positive patient must include a funduscopic
examination (risk of cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection
in patients with CD4 "50 cells/mm3), evaluation of the
oropharynx for oral candidiasis or oral hairy leukoplakia, skin, lymph nodes, genital and anal region, and
neurologic examination.
F. Table 1 provides a list of the basic laboratory studies
that should be obtained at the initial visit.
Table 1 Baseline Laboratory Assessment
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

CD4 cell count
Plasma HIV RNA
CBC with differential
Chemistry profile, transaminases, BUN/creatinine, rapid plasma reagent or VDRL
PPD (unless a reliable history of prior tuberculosis or positive skin
test can be obtained)
Serologies for Toxoplasma gondii, hepatitis A, B, and C
Pap smear for women
G6PD (assessment of risk for hemolysis with receipt of antioxidant
drugs like dapsone)—case dependent
Fasting blood glucose and serum lipids
Resistance testing should be considered given the risk for acquisition of drug-resistant virus

G6PD, Glucose-6 phosphate dehydrogenase.

319
NEWLY DIAGNOSED HIV-POSITIVE Patient

A Pretest and posttest counseling:

Test limitations
Treatment availability
Risk reduction
Available resources for support
Partner disclosure

B Testing:

ELISA to screen for chronic infection
If acute infection suspected, order ELISA
and HIV viral load

C Detailed history:

Source of infection
Risks for other STDs
Substance abuse
Prior OIs
(tuberculosis,
shingles, thrush)
Prior vaccines
Current medications
Comorbidities,
especially
cardiovascular
disease or risks
Women: last Pap
smear

D Detailed review of systems:

Energy, appetite, weight
loss
Fever, chills, night sweats
Headache, visual changes,
focal paresthesia, focal
weakness, confusion
Skin rashes
Cough, shortness of
breath, sputum
production
Abdominal pain, nausea,
vomiting, dysphagia,
odynophagia, diarrhea,
hematochezia
Dysuria, genital discharge,
genital itching, genital
ulcer or rash

E Complete physical

Cont’d on p 321

examination:
Body mass index
Funduscopy for
retinal lesions
Oral evaluation for
opportunistic
infections
Lymphadenopathy
Rashes
Genital and anal
lesions or
discharge
Neurologic
examination

F Laboratory studies:

CD4 count, HIV viral load
HIV genotype assay for
drug resistance
CBC and differential
Liver function tests,
creatinine, electrolytes,
fasting glucose
Syphilis test
Serology for hepatitis A,
B, C, Toxoplasma
gondii, varicella, CMV
G6PD assay
PPD
Pap smear

320
G. The CD4 count correlates well with immune function
and is used to gauge the risk for disease progression,
development of opportunistic infections (OIs) and
the need for OI prophylaxis. Antiretroviral therapy is
recommended for all patients with history of an
AIDS-defining illness regardless of CD4 count. Therapy is also recommended for asymptomatic patients
with CD4 count "200 cells/mm3. Asymptomatic
patients with CD4 counts of 201–350 cells/mm3
should be offered treatment. For asymptomatic patients with CD4 counts !350 cells/mm3 and HIV
RNA !100,000 copies/ml, most experienced clinicians defer therapy but some clinicians may consider
initiating treatment. Therapy should be deferred for
patients with CD4 counts !350 cells/mm3 and plasma
HIV RNA "100,000 copies/ml. Patients who are
symptom free and have a CD4 count !350 cells/mm3
and viral load "100,000 copies/ml should be monitored every 3 months for disease progression.
H. Plasma HIV-1 RNA quantification is a factor in determining when to initiate treatment and is critical when
assessing response to therapy. The minimal change in
viral load considered to be statistically significant is a
threefold, or a 0.5 log10 copies/ml, change. The goal
of antiretroviral therapy is a viral load below the level
of detection ("50 copies/ml using the Amplicor
assay). Prior to the initiation of therapy viral load

should be measured. Viral load measurement should
be repeated at 2–8 weeks following treatment initiation to assess response. There should be a decrease of
at least 1.0 log10 copies/ml. Viral load reduction to below the limits of assay detection in a treatment-naive
patient should occur within the first 4–6 months of
therapy. Once a patient is on standard antiretroviral
treatment, viral load testing should be repeated every
3–4 months.
The goal of antiretroviral therapy is to maximally inhibit viral replication and minimize the development of
resistant strains of HIV. There are currently four classes
of antiretroviral medications: nucleoside/nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitors, nonnucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs), protease inhibitors
(PI), and entry inhibitors. A summary of preferred initial
regimens is found in Table 2.
I. Despite the improving efficacy of antiretroviral therapy, appropriate prophylaxis against opportunistic infection remains a clinical imperative in the care of
persons with HIV infection. Prophylaxis against mycobacterium tuberculosis, Pneumocystis pneumonia,
Toxoplasma gondii, Mycobacterium avium complex,
and varicella virus are recommended as standard of
care (Table 3).
J. Recommended immunizations for HIV positive patients
are outlined in Table 4.

Table 2 Selected Recommended Antiretroviral Therapy Regimens
Preferred
Efavirenz # (lamivudine or emtricitabine) # (zidovudine or tenofovir)
Lopinavir/ritonavir (coformulation) # (lamivudine or emtricitabine) # zidovudine
Alternative Regimens
Efavirenz # (lamivudine or emtricitabine) # (abacavir or didanosine or stavudine)
Nevirapine # (lamivudine or emtricitabine) # (zidovudine or stavudine or didanosine or abacavir or tenofovir)
• Only administer nevirapine-based regimens to women with CD4 counts "250 cells/mm3 and men with CD4 counts "400 cells/mm3
Atazanavir # (lamivudine or emtricitabine) # (zidovudine or stavudine or abacavir or didanosine) or (tenofovir # ritonavir)
Lopinavir/ritonavir # (lamivudine or emtricitabine) # (zidovudine or stavudine or abacavir or tenofovir or didanosine)
Fosamprenavir/ritonavir # (lamivudine or emtricitabine) # (zidovudine or stavudine or abacavir or tenofovir or didanosine)
Fosamprenavir/ritonavir # (lamivudine or emtricitabine) # (zidovudine or stavudine or abacavir or tenofovir or didanosine)
Indinavir/ritonavir # (lamivudine or emtricitabine) # (zidovudine or stavudine or abacavir or tenofovir or didanosine)
Abacavir # zidovudine # lamivudine
• Only when a preferred or alternative NNRTI or PI-based regimen cannot or should not be used

Table 3 Prophylaxis for Opportunistic Infections
Organism
Pneumocystis pneumonia
Toxoplasmosis
Mycobacterium tuberculosis

Indication
3

CD4 count "200 cells/mm or history of oral
candidiasis
CD4 count "100 cells/mm3 and Toxoplasma
gondii IgG positive
Tuberculin skin test ! 5 mm induration and
active tuberculosis has been excluded

Mycobacterium avium complex

CD4 "50 cells/mm3

Varicella virus

Significant exposure to chicken pox with no
history or zoster with no history

Preferred Prophylactic Regimen
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (DS QD, SS QD,
DS 3$/wk)
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 1 DS QD or 1 SS QD
INH 300 mg PO QD $ 9–12 mo
All persons with HIV exposed to active tuberculosis
should receive prophylactic therapy regardless of skin
testing results
Azithromycin 1200 mg PO qwk or clarithromycin
500 mg PO bid
Varicella-zoster immune globulin within 96 hr of
exposure

321
NEWLY DIAGNOSED HIV-POSITIVE Patient
(Cont’d from p 319)

G Integrate history, physical examination, and laboratory tests to determine:
Strength of immune system
Possible presence of active opportunistic infections
Need for active treatment against opportunistic infections, prohylaxis,
and/or antiretroviral therapy (see below)

J Prophylaxis for opportunistic infections:

Contingent upon CD4 count and prior infections
See Table 3 for details

K Immunizations:

Pneumococcal vaccine (often deferred until CD4 count !200 cells/mm3)
Hepatitis A (for patients who practice anal intercourse or international travelers)
contingent upon CD4 count and prior infections
Hepatitis B
Tetanus, diphtheria, and acellular pertusis boosters
Influenza (yearly)

H

I Antiretroviral treatment:

Decision to treat based on clinical status, history of opportunistic infections, CD4 counts, and viral load
Treatment thresholds and recommended agents change frequently
Refer patient to an HIV specialist or refer to www.aidsinfo.nih.gov for the latest recommendations

H Monitoring:

Repeat CD4 count and viral load 2–8 wk following treatment initiation
Repeat testing every 3–4 mo

Table 4 Immunizations for HIV-Infected Adults
•
•
•
•

Pneumococcal vaccination
Influenza vaccination (yearly)
Hepatitis B
Hepatitis A (particularly MSM patients and those wanting to travel to
endemic areas)
• Diphtheria and tetanus boosters (as per protocol in non-HIV infected
patients)
With the exception of influenza vaccine, which is given yearly, vaccines
should be given early in the course of HIV infection if possible to
increase the likelihood of adequate responses

References
Guidelines for the use of antiretroviral agents in HIV-1-infected adults
and adolescents, Panel on Clinical Practices for Treatment of
HIV Infection convened by the Department of Health and Human
Services, October 2006.
Guidelines for preventing opportunistic infections among HIV-infected
persons—2002. MMWR 2002;51(RR08):1–46.
Hammer S. Management of newly diagnosed HIV infection. N Engl
J Med 2005;353(16):1702–1710.
Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R, eds. Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, ed 6. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone, 2005.

