ASCITES
The most common cause of ascites is cirrhosis, which accounts for approximately 80% of cases. Patients with ascites should be extensively questioned regarding risk factors
for liver disease. Cancer is the cause in about 10% of cases.
Other causes include heart failure, tuberculosis, dialysis,
and pancreatic diseases. Rare causes include surgery or
trauma to the lymphatics, chlamydia peritonitis, nephrotic
syndrome, systemic lupus erythematosus, myxedema, and
AIDS-related infections.
The accuracy of physical findings is variable, depending
on the amount of fluid present, technique, and clinical setting (may be difficult in patients who are obese). The absence of flank dullness is the most accurate predictor
against the presence of ascites. Approximately 1500 ml of
fluid has to be present for flank dullness to be detected.
When flank dullness is detected, it is useful to see if it
shifts with rotation of the patient (i.e., shifting dullness).
Ultrasound is helpful when physical examination is not
definite.
A. All patients with new-onset ascites should undergo abdominal paracentesis. Abdominal paracentesis is the
most rapid and cost-effective method of diagnosing the
cause of ascites and determining whether fluid is infected. All patients with decompensated liver disease
with ascites should undergo paracentesis to rule out
spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. In addition, all patients with fever, abdominal pain or tenderness, mental
status changes, ileus, or hypotension should undergo
paracentesis to rule out infection. Peripheral leukocytosis, acidosis, and worsening renal function are other
indications to perform abdominal paracentesis in patients with ascites.
B. Serum-to-ascites albumin gradient (SAAG) accurately
identifies the presence of portal hypertension and is
more useful than the protein-based exudate/transudate
concept. Calculating the SAAG involves measuring the
albumin concentration of serum and ascitic fluid specimens obtained on the same day and subtracting the
ascitic fluid value from the serum value. If the SAAG
is !1.1 g/dl, the patient has portal hypertension or
high albumin gradient ascites.
C. Initial tests on ascitic fluid include cell count and
differential, total protein, and SAAG. If infection
is suspected, fluid should be cultured at the bedside in
blood culture bottles. Other tests include glucose,

192

lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), Gram stain, and amylase concentration. Cytology, tuberculosis smear and
culture, triglyceride, and bilirubin concentration
should be performed as indicated.
D. An absolute polymorphonuclear (PMN) count !250
cells/mm3 is the most sensitive and rapid way of detecting spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP). Antibiotics
should be considered in any patient with a PMN count
of 250 cells/mm3. SBP is a preventable cause of death
in patients with cirrhosis and ascites. Hence, prompt
detection and treatment are very important.
E. Patients with high SAAG ascites (portal hypertension)
usually are responsive to salt restriction and diuretics.
Fluid loss and weight change are related directly to sodium balance in patients with portal hypertension–
related ascites. Dietary sodium is restricted to 2 g/day
or 88 mmol/day. Fluid restriction is not necessary in
treating patients with cirrhosis and ascites unless the
serum sodium is "120 mmol/L. The usual diuretic
regimen for cirrhotic ascites consists of spironolactone
100 mg and furosemide 40 mg. If this dose is ineffective
in increasing urinary sodium or decreasing body weight,
the doses of both medications should be increased simultaneously as needed at a 100:40 ratio (e.g., spironolactone 200 mg plus furosemide 80 mg, then 300 mg
plus 120 mg, and finally 400 mg plus 160 mg). A single
large-volume paracentesis followed by diet and diuretic
therapy is appropriate for patients with tense ascites.
Patients who are diuretic sensitive preferably should
be treated with sodium restriction and oral diuretics
rather than with serial paracentesis. Liver transplantation should be considered in patients with cirrhosis and
ascites. Serial therapeutic paracentesis or transjugular
intrahepatic portasystemic stent (TIPS) may be performed in patients with refractory ascites.
F. Peritoneal carcinomatosis is the most common cause
of low albumin–gradient ascites (SAAG "1.1 g/dl).
Ascites caused by tuberculous peritonitis are treated
by antituberculous therapy. Pancreatic ascites may
resolve spontaneously, require endoscopic stent placement in the pancreatic duct or operative intervention,
or respond to treatment with somatostatin. Chlamydia
peritonitis is treated with tetracycline. Ascites caused
by lupus serositis may respond to glucocorticoids.
Dialysis-related ascites may respond to aggressive
dialysis.

193
Patient with ASCITES

A Abdominal paracentesis

Gross
appearance
of fluid

Transparent yellow
or crystal clear
or cloudy yellow

Special testing or
cell count correction

WBC count
(cells/mm3)

Bloody

Milky

Dark brown

Subtract 1
WBC/750 RBC
Subtract 1
PMN/250 RBC

Triglyceride
concentration

Quantitative
bilirubin
concentration

! 500

"500

PMN count
(cells/mm3)

D !250

" 250

B SAAG (g/dl)

!50%
PMN
!1.1

"50%
PMN

"1.1

C Other

testing
TP
"2.5 g/dl

!1.1

TP
TP
! 2.5 g/dl " 2.5 g/dl

E Uncomplicated

Nephrotic
ascites

cirrhotic ascites

!1.1

Ascitic
fluid
amylase
#100 U/L

Polymicrobial
infection, TP
#1 g/dl,
glucose " 50
mg/dl, LDH
!225 U/L

Positive
cytology

Send culture
for mycobacteria

"1.1

Positive
cytology

Send culture
for mycobacteria

F Tuberculous
peritonitis

Cardiac
ascites

Ultrasound
and/or liver biopsy

Single
organism in
culture, TP
"1 g/dl,
glucose #50
mg/dl, LDH
" 225 U/L

" 1.1

SBP

Secondary
bacterial
peritonitis

Clinical
response to
antibiotic

Upright
abdominal
film, watersoluble gut
contrast
studies

Pancreatic Peritoneal
ascites
carcinomatosis
with portal
hypertension

24-hr
urine protein
excretion

Chest roentgenogram
and echocardiogram

Pancreatic
protocol—
abdominal CT

Consideration of
surgical intervention
if gut rupture is
documented

Tuberculous Peritoneal
peritonitis
carcinomawith
tosis
underlying
cirrhosis

Search for
primary tumor

Mycobacterial
growth on
culture of
laparoscopic
biopsy of
peritoneum

Antituberculous
Therapy

TP, Total protein.

References
Cattau E, Benjamin SB, Knuff TE, Castell DO. The accuracy of the physical
exam in the diagnosis of suspected ascites. JAMA 1982;247:1164.
Moore KP, Wong F, Gines P, Bernardi M. The management of ascites in
cirrhosis: Report on Consensus Conference of the International Ascites Club. Hepatology 2003;38:258.
Runyon BA. AASLD guideline: Management of adult patients with ascites due to cirrhosis. Hepatology 2004;39:841.

Runyon BA. Ascites and spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. In Feldman M,
Friedman LS, Sleisenger MH, eds. Sleisenger and Fordtran’s GastroIntestinal and Liver Disease: Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, and Treatment. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2002:1517–1542.
Runyon BA, Montano AA, Akriviadis EA, et al. The serum-ascites albumin gradient is superior to the exudate-transudate concept in the
differential diagnosis of ascites. Ann Intern Med 1992;117:215.

