ASEPTIC MENINGITIS

A. If there is clinical suspicion for meningitis, a lumbar
puncture (LP) should be performed (prior imaging
may be indicated). At a minimum, glucose, protein,
cell count, Gram stain, and bacterial cultures should be
obtained from the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). The history and physical examination will dictate what other
tests, if any, should be sent (see later). It is prudent to
obtain an extra tube of CSF in case further studies
become necessary.
B. Aseptic meningitis describes a syndrome of clinical
and laboratory findings consistent with meningeal
inflammation with negative Gram stain and routine
bacterial cultures from the CSF. Glucose, protein, and
cell counts can be highly variable and should not be
relied on to distinguish between septic and aseptic
meningitis; the threshold for initiation of empiric dexamethasone and antibiotics should be low.
Parameningeal bacterial infections (e.g., mastoiditis,
epidural abscess) and partially treated bacterial meningitis can have a similar clinical presentation with
negative CSF cultures, so these should be excluded.
C. For all patients, risk factors for HIV, herpes simplex
virus (HSV), and syphilis should be ascertained. A
positive CSF-VDRL is highly specific but insensitive
for neurosyphilis; antibody tests specific for Treponema
pallidum may prove to be more sensitive. Neurosyphilis is classically treated with IV penicillin.
D. HIV itself can cause meningitis, particularly during the
seroconversion syndrome of acute HIV and in latestage disease. It is also a risk factor for opportunistic
infections of the CNS, such as Cryptococcus (see Central Nervous System Infection in the Patient with
HIV). In patients with risk factors for HIV, aseptic
meningitis should trigger testing for acute HIV by serum enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
and serum polymerase chain reaction (PCR). CSF
PCR for HIV is also available.
E. HSV is a very common cause of aseptic meningitis. It
is usually caused by HSV-2. During the primary
episode, most patients will also have active or very
recent genital lesions. The diagnosis can be confirmed
by PCR on CSF.
F. A travel history may reveal risk factors for tuberculosis,
coccidiomycosis, and parasites: all possible causes of
aseptic meningitis. Special culture media are required
to isolate mycobacteria and fungi from the CSF.
Elicit any history of exposure to ticks—which may
carry Lyme disease, ehrlichiosis, or Rocky Mountain
spotted fever—and to mosquitoes—vectors for
viruses such as West Nile, St. Louis, Eastern Equine,
308

and Western and California encephalitides. A history
of possible exposure to rodents or their excreta can
raise the index of suspicion for lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus and leptospirosis. If one of these is
suspected, specific serology and in some cases CSF
PCR testing can be obtained.
Enteroviruses (coxsackie A and B and echoviruses)
are the most commonly identified cause of aseptic
meningitis. The CSF, nasopharynx, and stool can be
cultured for enterovirus. CSF PCR for enterovirus is
also available.
Other viruses known to cause meningitis include
influenza; parainfluenza type 3; mumps; measles;
varicella-zoster (primary infection or secondary outbreak); Epstein-Barr; cytomegalovirus; adenoviruses;
and human herpes virus types 6, 7, and 8. Serology and
in some cases CSF PCR may be useful in making these
diagnoses.
Aseptic meningitis has been less frequently associated
with a large number of other infectious agents, including
Mycoplasma spp., Legionella spp., Whipple’s disease,
and Bartonella henselae (cat scratch disease).
G. Noninfectious causes of meningitis, such as subarachnoid hemorrhage, carcinomatous meningitis, and rheumatologic causes (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus,
Behçet’s disease, vasculitis, and sarcoidosis), should be
considered in the appropriate settings. Meningeal inflammation has been reported with the use of NSAIDs,
some antibiotics, IV immune globulin, and some cancer
therapies.

References
Connolly KJ, Hammer SM. The acute aseptic meningitis syndrome.
Infect Dis Clin North Am 1990;4(4):599–622.
de Gans J, van de Beek D, for the European Dexamethasone in Adulthood
Bacterial Meningitis Study Investigators. Dexamethasone in adults
with bacterial meningitis. N Engl J Med 2002;347(20):1549–1556.
Hasbun R, Abrahams J, Jekel J, et al. Computed tomography of the head
before lumbar puncture in adults with suspected meningitis. N Engl
J Med 2001;345(24):1727–1733.
Hildebrand J, Aoun M. Chronic meningitis: still a diagnostic challenge.
J Neurol 2003;250(6):653–660.
Huang C, Morse D, Slater B, et al. Multiple-year experience in the
diagnosis of viral central nervous system infections with a panel
of polymerase chain reaction assays for detection of 11 viruses. Clin
Infect Dis 2004;39:630–635.
Jolles S, Sewell WAC, Leighton C. Drug-induced aseptic meningitis:
diagnosis and management. Drug Saf 2000;22(3):215–226.
Tunkel AR, Scheld WM. Acute meningitis. In Mandell GL, Bennett JE,
Dolin R, eds. Principles and Practices of Infectious Diseases, 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier, Churchill, Livingstone; 2005:1083–1126.

309
Patient with SIGNS/SYMPTOMS OF MENINGITIS
History, physical and detailed
neurologic examination

Nonfocal examination

Focal signs, seizures,
altered mental status
CT scan
Safe for LP

A LP for glucose, protein, cell count,

Gram stain, bacterial cultures, other tests
depending on epidemiology and history
Hold an extra tube of CSF in laboratory

Meningeal inflammation (elevated WBC,
low glucose, or high protein) present

Normal
Watchful waiting

B Gram stain/culture

Gram stain/culture
positive

Patient has aseptic meningitis
Consider epidemiology and risk
factors

negative

Appropriate antibiotics

C Serologic or

D Risk for HIV:

CSF evidence
of syphilis

HIV test

Treat neurosyphilis
Source of aseptic
meningitis could be
HIV itself or secondary
opportunistic infections

E HSV PCR
If positive:
acyclovir

F History of

travel or
exposures

Targeted
serology and/or
PCR/culture

G Noninfectious causes:

Drugs
Carcinoma
Autoimmune disease
Hemorrhage
etc.

