ASSESSMENT AND INITIAL MANAGEMENT OF ST-SEGMENT ELEVATION MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION


Acute coronary syndromes (ACSs) are a major contributor to
worldwide morbidity and mortality. In the subset of patients
with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI),
suggestive of complete coronary obstruction, the therapeutic principles favor prompt and early recognition of this
condition and rapid restoration of coronary flow to reduce
the likelihood of major sequelae of STEMI, including heart
failure, arrhythmias, mechanical complications (ventricular
rupture, ventricular septal defect, valvular dysfunction), and
death. Early identification of symptoms suggestive of myocardial infarction (MI), including chest, back, neck, or jaw
pain, and activation of medical services result in the most
prompt treatment of this condition. Patients with suspected
MI should receive 162–325 mg of aspirin, if available, prior
to arrival of emergency medical personnel or on first medical contact. Prehospital management including fibrinolysis
in appropriate settings is outside the scope of this textbook.
A. At initial hospital contact, an initial brief assessment by
triage personnel should be targeted to rapidly identify
patients with angina or anginal equivalent possibly
suggestive of MI. All patients with suspected MI
should have a 12-lead ECG performed and be evaluated by an experienced physician within 10 minutes of
hospital presentation. Aspirin (162–325 mg) should be
given if not previously received.
B. Initial physician contact should result in a targeted
history and physical examination designed to assess the
likelihood of MI or an alternative diagnosis, risks associated with MI, and possible therapies. History should
include presence of cardiovascular risk factors, prior
MI, ACSs, and cardiovascular procedures and should
focus on symptoms related to ACSs, aortic dissection,
risk of bleeding, and cerebrovascular disease (both
acute and chronic). Physical examination should be performed to aid in the diagnosis of MI and assessment of
possible complications, including mechanical complications, right ventricular (RV) infarction, and cardiogenic
shock. A focused neurologic evaluation should be performed to assess for evidence of a prior stroke before

98

initiation of fibrinolytic therapy. Laboratory evaluation
including cardiac biomarkers should be performed but
should not delay the initiation of reperfusion therapy.
Similarly, chest radiography should be performed but
should not delay initiation of reperfusion therapy unless
it is used for the suspected identification of a contraindication to reperfusion such as aortic dissection.
Coincident with the initial history and physical evaluation, initial medical management should include the
placement of a cardiac rhythm monitor, IV access, aspirin if not already received, supplemental oxygen, sublingual nitroglycerin in patients with chest discomfort
(and systolic blood pressure [SBP] of !90 mm Hg,
heart rate [HR] 50–100 beats per minute, and no suspected RV infarction).
C. If based on the initial evaluation STEMI is excluded,
appropriate measures should be initiated for evaluation
and treatment of alternative diagnoses.
D. For patients with confirmed STEMI, decision making
regarding reperfusion strategy should be based on time
since initial symptom onset, STEMI-related risk, risk of
therapeutic options, and available resources. Uncomplicated presentations with very rapid presentations
have favorable prognoses regardless of treatment strategy. Risk stratification for patients with STEMI includes infarct location (anterior vs. inferior), presence
of cardiogenic shock, heart failure, hemodynamic compromise, or mechanical complications; the risk of complications associated with fibrinolysis; and the likely
time to treatment dependent on strategy chosen. Contraindications to fibrinolysis are generally considered to
include chest pain duration !12 hours, SBP !180 mm
Hg, diastolic blood pressure [DBP] !110 mm Hg,
blood pressure difference between arms of !15 mm
Hg, known structural CNS disease, closed head/facial
trauma within 3 months, major trauma or surgery
within 6 weeks, GI or genitourinary bleeding, history of
bleeding or clotting problems or current use of blood
thinning agents, CPR !10 minutes, pregnancy, and
serious systemic disease such as advanced cancer.
(Continued on page 100)

99
Patient with SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS OF
ACUTE MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION

A 12-lead ECG

Brief, targeted
history

B Initial nursing care

Cardiac monitor
Oxygen
IV with D5W
Initial blood tests
Nitroglycerin (unless hypotension)
Aspirin

Initial physician evaluation
History
Physical examination
ECG interpretation

Patient with
likely STEMI?

C No
Assess and treat for
additional diagnoses,
including unstable angina/
NSTEMI, aortic dissection,
pulmonary embolus,
GI ulcer, pericarditis

D Yes
Assess:
Time since symptom onset
Risk of STEMI
Risk of fibrinolysis
Transfer to skilled PCI center

Cont’d on p 101

100
E. Medical therapy coincident with planning for reperfusion includes IV and/or oral beta-adrenergic receptor antagonists (beta blockers) for patients without contraindication, morphine for patients with
ongoing discomfort despite initial management, and
antithrombotic therapy dependent of reperfusion
strategy.
F. Choice of reperfusion strategy is dependent on factors
noted in section D. An invasive cardiac catheterization
strategy is generally preferred in patients for whom rapid
treatment in an expert percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) center (door to balloon time "60 minutes and
medical contact to balloon time "90 minutes) is available. An invasive strategy is also preferred in patients
who present late (beyond 12 hours), in those for whom
fibrinolytic therapy is contraindicated, and in those with
cardiogenic shock or Killip class #3. A fibrinolytic strategy is preferred if invasive therapy is not available or is
likely to be delayed (door to needle time !60 minutes,
medical contact to balloon time !90 minutes), especially
if the patient presents within 3 hours of the onset of
symptoms.
G. For those patients in whom an invasive strategy is
selected, it is reasonable to begin treatment with an
antithrombin (unfractionated heparin [UFH] or low
molecular weight heparin [LMWH]), a glycoprotein
IIb/IIIa inhibitor, and clopidogrel prior to cardiac
catheterization. For patients receiving fibrin-specific
thrombolytic therapy, antithrombotic therapy is indicated. For nonspecific fibrinolytic therapy, such as
streptokinase, recent clinical trial evidence suggests
that clopidogrel (300 mg in persons "75 years old,
and 75 mg in patients !75 years old) improves clinical
outcomes and long-term infarct-related artery
patency and should be considered in the absence of
contraindications.
H. In patients to whom fibrinolytics are administered,
cardiac catheterization should be performed if there
is evidence of failure of reperfusion manifest by

ongoing anginal symptoms or failure of the STsegment elevation to resolve. Among patients without these features, cardiac catheterization prior to
discharge from the hospital is preferred in patients
with evidence of congestive heart failure, significant
left ventricular dysfunction, recurrent clinical ischemia, complex ventricular arrhythmias, or significant
ischemia on a functional study.
I. Among patients who have either a primary invasive
strategy for reperfusion or PCI or have cardiac catheterization following fibrinolysis, mechanical revascularization is based on coronary anatomy.
J. Post-MI management is described in an another
chapter.
References
Antman EM, Anbe DT, Armstrong PW, et al. ACC/AHA guidelines for
the management of patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction:
a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Committee to Revise the
1999 Guidelines for the Management of patients with acute myocardial infarction). J Am Coll Cardiol 2004;44(3):E1–E211.
Antman EM, Anbe DT, Armstrong PW, et al. ACC/AHA guidelines for
the management of patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction—executive summary. A report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines
(Writing Committee to revise the 1999 guidelines for the management
of patients with acute myocardial infarction). J Am Coll Cardiol
2004;44(3):671–719.
Armstrong PW, Bogaty P, Buller CE, et al; Canadian Cardiovascular Society Working Group. The 2004 ACC/AHA Guidelines: a perspective and
adaptation for Canada by the Canadian Cardiovascular Society Working
Group. Can J Cardiol 2004;20(11):1075–1079.
Fox KA, Goodman SG, Anderson FA Jr, et al. From guidelines to clinical
practice: the impact of hospital and geographical characteristics on
temporal trends in the management of acute coronary syndromes. The
Global Registry of Acute Coronary Events (GRACE). Eur Heart J
2003;24(15):1414–1424.
Giugliano RP, Braunwald E. 2004 ACC/AHA guideline for the management
of patients with STEMI: the implications for clinicians. Nat Clin Pract
Cardiovasc Med 2005;2(3):114–115.
Sabatine MS, Cannon CP, Gibson CM, et al. CLARITY-TIMI 28 Investigators. Addition of clopidogrel to aspirin and fibrinolytic therapy for
myocardial infarction with ST-segment elevation. N Engl J Med
2005;352(12):1179–1189.

101
Patient with SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS OF
ACUTE MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION
(Cont’d from p 99)

E Initial medical therapy:
Morphine
Aspirin
Antithrombin
Nitrates (for chest
discomfort)
Beta blockers

F Choice of reperfusion strategy

Fibrinolysis is preferred if:
Early presentation ("3 hr)
and delay to PCI
Invasive strategy is not an
option (no catheterization
laboratory or skilled PCI
facility available, vascular
access difficulties)
Delay to invasive strategy
(door to balloon time
anticipated !60 min,
medical contact to balloon
time anticipated !90 min)

Invasive strategy is preferred if:
Skilled PCI laboratory is
available with door to balloon
time anticipated "60 min,
medical contact to balloon
time anticipated "90 min,
surgical backup available
High-risk STEMI (cardiogenic
shock, Killip class #3)
Contraindication to fibrinolysis
Late presentation (symptom
onset !3 hr)
Diagnosis of STEMI is uncertain

Fibrinolysis selected

Evidence of reperfusion
with resolution of chest
pain and ST-segment
elevation

Functional
evaluation

No significant
ischemia

Evidence of failed
reperfusion with ongoing
chest pain and/or
ST-segment elevation

H High-risk

indicators

Clinically
significant
ischemia

I

Cardiac Catheterization

Revascularization
as indicated

J Post-MI counseling
and care

G Invasive strategy selected

Premedication
Aspirin if not already given
Clopidogrel loading dose
Consider glycoprotein
IIb/IIIa inhibitor

