ASTHMA


A. Asthma is a chronic inflammatory lung disease characterized by episodes of increased airway inflammation
resulting in airflow obstruction and dyspnea. The physician should consider a diagnosis of asthma in patients
who have dyspnea on exertion, cough, or wheezing. As
with any patient, the first step in evaluation is a thorough history, in this case with particular focus on conditions that trigger symptoms. Some examples of classic triggers of asthma include exercise, cold air, upper
respiratory tract infections, animal dander, pollen,
mold, and tobacco smoke. Because asthma is often associated with atopy, the physician should inquire about
a personal history of eczema and seasonal allergies.
Additionally, a family history of asthma or other atopic
disease would support a diagnosis of asthma.
B. The physical examination in patients with asthma is
often completely normal. That being said, one should
listen for wheezing on lung examination and upper
airway sounds (stridor) because this large airway obstruction can sometimes mimic asthma. In addition,
the nares should be inspected for nasal polyps that can
be found as part of a triad of asthma, nasal polyps, and
aspirin sensitivity. The posterior oro-pharynx should be
examined for “cobblestoning” associated with postnasal drip, a common exacerbating condition in asthma.
C. Although there is no single diagnostic test for asthma,
spirometry with bronchodilator responsiveness is a
common next step in the evaluation. Most patients
with asthma will have normal pulmonary function
when not having an exacerbation, so this finding does
not exclude the diagnosis. If the patient is symptomatic, the spirometry should show an obstructive pattern
with forced expiratory volume (FEV1)/forced vital capacity (FVC) !70%. If either FEV1 or FVC improves
with the use of a bronchodilator, this would support
the diagnosis of asthma because part of the definition
of the disease is reversibility of airflow obstruction.
The American Thoracic Society (ATS) criteria for “responsiveness” require an increase of 200 ml and 12%
in either FEV1 or FVC.
D. As already stated, a key aspect of asthma is variability
in airflow obstruction. An alternative way to demonstrate this is with ambulatory peak flow monitoring.

506

Peak flow meters are reasonably inexpensive and portable; however, the data are limited by the fact that the
results are effort dependent. After being instructed in
appropriate technique, patients should obtain peak
flows at different times of day, when asymptomatic and
when dyspneic or wheezy. Variability in peak flows
"20% is consistent with asthma. Although useful diagnostically, the peak flow meter is generally more useful
as a way to monitor for control of established disease.
E. If neither of these studies is revealing, it is reasonable
to consider bronchoprovocation testing, traditionally
done with methacholine. Patients are given progressively higher concentrations of inhaled methacholine,
a muscarinic agonist that causes smooth muscle contraction, with repeated spirometry. The test is positive
if there is a fall in FEV1 of 20% from baseline. This test
has a high negative predictive value, so it is most helpful as a way to rule out asthma. If a patient is unresponsive to methacholine, alternative diagnoses should be
sought for the patient’s dyspnea, cough, or wheeze.
F. Asthma is treated with a combination of quick relief
and controller medications. The typical quick relief
medication is a beta agonist inhaler, such as albuterol.
Ideally, a patient’s asthma is well enough controlled
that there is only rare use of the reliever medication. If
albuterol is required more than a few times a week, a
controller medication should be initiated. For most
patients, this means a steroid inhaler, although some
patients respond well to leukotriene modifiers as firstline therapy. If symptoms are still not well controlled,
higher-dose steroid inhalers or the addition of a longacting beta agonist can be considered. If further escalation of therapy is required, it is appropriate to look
for other causes of dyspnea and wheeze and refer the
patient to a pulmonologist.
G. `In addition to pharmacologic interventions, patients
should be counseled to avoid triggers by minimizing allergen exposure and maintaining a clean living environment. If a patient with asthma is currently smoking,
smoking cessation is essential. Clinicians should also create an “action plan” with patients based on peak flow
measurements with thresholds for increasing therapy
and seeking medical attention.

507
Patient with ASTHMA

A Complete history

Triggers
History of atopy
Family history of atopy

B Physical examination

Nasal polyps
Cobblestoning
Wheezing or stridor

C Spirometry with

bronchodilator testing

Obstruction (FEV1/FVC !70%
or response to bronchodilator)

Normal

D Peak flow monitoring

F Initiate therapy
G Environmental controls

20% variability

Smoking cessation
Action plan

Normal

E Methacholine
challenge

Positive

Negative
Seek alternative
diagnosis

Reliever medication:
Short-acting beta
agonist (albuterol)

Controller medication:
Steroid inhaler
Leukotriene modifier

Additional agents:
Long-acting beta agonist*
Theophylline
Anti-lgE therapy
Consider referral to
pulmonologist

*Should not be used on its own because there is evidence of increased mortality with this use.

References
Chervinsky P, van As A, Bronsky EA, et al. Fluticasone propionate
aerosol for the treatment of adults with mild to moderate asthma. The
Fluticasone Propionate Asthma Study Group. J Allergy Clin Immunol
1994;94:676–693.
Global Initiative for Asthma (GINA). 2006. Available at: www.
ginasthma.com.
National Heart, L.a.B.I., NHLBI. National Asthma Education and
Prevention Program: Clinical treatment guidelines, 1997.

National Heart, L.a.B.I., NHLBI. National Asthma Education and
Prevention Project: Update on selected topics, 2002.
Popa V. ATS guidelines for methacholine and exercise challenge testing.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2001;163(1):292–293.
Sears MR. The definition and diagnosis of asthma. Allergy 1993;48
(17 Suppl):12-16; discussion 22–23.
Suissa, S, Dennis R, Ernst P, et al. Effectiveness of the leukotriene
receptor antagonist zafirlukast for mild-to-moderate asthma. A
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Ann Intern Med
1997;126(3):177–183.

