ASYMPTOMATIC ABNORMAL LIVER
AMINOTRANSFERASES

Liver aminotransferases include aspartate aminotransferase
(AST, formerly SGOT) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT,
formerly SGPT). They actively participate in the process of
gluconeogenesis as mitochondrial and cytosolic enzymes
within the hepatocyte. Other liver biochemical enzymes include alkaline phosphatase (canalicular membrane), gamma
glutamyl transpeptidase (hepatocyte and biliary epithelia),
and 5´-nucleotidase (sinusoidal and canalicular membrane).
Abnormally increased serum liver enzymes are reported
in approximately 0.5%–4% of the asymptomatic population, usually when routine health screening testing is
performed. The first step when evaluating a patient with
increased liver biochemistries is to assess the degree of
abnormality. If those are minimal (usually 2–5 times the
upper limit of the reference range), retesting is necessary
to avoid excessive and expensive workup.
Of significance is that reference laboratory values are
defined as the mean of the distribution ± 2 standard deviations of the normal population. Therefore, there will always
be a subset of asymptomatic patients (2.5% above and
2.5% below the reference range) without any demonstrable
cause of minimally “abnormal” liver chemistries. However,
patients with underlying chronic liver disease may have
fluctuating levels of “normal” serum liver biochemistries
throughout the course of their disease. Physiologic states
can also lead to elevated liver enzymes (e.g., pregnancy induces elevation of alkaline phosphatase).
A. If a significant abnormal pattern is detected, use the
diagnostic clues to guide further testing. During the
initial evaluation, review patient symptoms; risk factors
for liver disease (alcohol abuse, illicit drug use, tattoos,
history of blood transfusions, sexual history); associated
morbid conditions (diabetes or glucose intolerance,

222

obesity, dyslipidemia); medications (including herbal/
alternative and over-the-counter medications); and
family history. Perform a thorough physical examination. Look for stigmata of chronic liver disease such as
spider angiomas, palmar erythema, gynecomastia, testicular atrophy, and Duputyren’s contractures during
physical examination.
B. The clinical significance of any liver chemistry test abnormality must be interpreted in the context of each
clinical setting. Generally, these abnormalities can be
further categorized into three main groups: hepatocellular injury predominance (AST/ALT), associated
cholestasis (increased alkaline phosphatase and bilirubin), and/or associated impaired metabolic/synthetic
liver function (low albumin, prolonged prothrombin
time [PT]). Specific ratios and levels of serum AST to
ALT may be useful in differential diagnosis. For example, in most forms of acute liver injury this ratio is
!1, whereas in alcoholic hepatitis it is typically "2.
Elevation of these enzymes "1000 U/L suggests ongoing acute viral, drug, or ischemic insult to the liver.
Epidemiologic factors help guide further evaluation
and management. Worldwide, viral hepatitides are the
most common causes of abnormal liver transaminases.
Hereditary hemochromatosis (HH) is also frequent.
Therefore, initial testing for mildly elevated aminotransferases must include serologies for hepatitis A, B,
and C viruses as well as fasting iron (Fe) studies (serum ferritin and iron saturation). Nonalcoholic fatty
liver disease (NAFLD) unfortunately has no specific
serologic test available, and it is increasing in frequency. Risk factors for fatty liver include the presence
of obesity, hypertriglyceridemia, glucose intolerance,
and diabetes mellitus.
(Continued on page 224)

223
Patient with ASYMPTOMATIC ABNORMAL LIVER AMINOTRANSFERASES
Elevated ALT and AST#5 times normal

A History and

physical examination,*
Discontinuation of
hepatotoxic medications
Confirm abnormality
if an error is suspected

B Liver chemistries, PT,

albumin, CBC with platelets
Hepatitis A, B, and C serologies†
Iron, total iron-binding capacity, ferritin

Negative serology,
asymptomatic patient
without hepatic
decompensation

Positive serologic
evaluation
Cont’d on p 225

Cont’d on p 225

224
C. If hepatitis serologies and iron studies are normal, serum ceruloplasmin and alpha-1-antitrypsin should be
measured to screen for Wilson’s disease and alpha1-antitrypsin deficiency disorders, respectively.
Chronic autoimmune hepatitis can be another less
common cause of liver AST/ALT elevation. It occurs
predominantly in women and is often associated with
thyroiditis and other autoimmune disorders. Serum
serologic markers to screen for autoimmune hepatitis
include antinuclear antibody (ANA), anti–smoothmuscle antibody (Ab), and potentially liver kidney
microsomal (LKM) antibody. Other hepatotropic viruses (concomitant hepatitis E and D, Epstein-Barr,
cytomegalovirus, and herpes) or infiltrating liver disease (sarcoidosis, tuberculosis, amyloidosis, fungal
infection, and lymphomas) can be a cause for elevated
aminotransferases. Uncommon nonhepatic causes for
abnormal transaminases include thyroid disease,
muscle disorders, celiac disease, hemolysis, and
strenuous exercise.
When the alkaline phosphatase is also found to be
abnormally elevated, hepatobiliary or nonhepatic origin
should be differentiated. Serum assays of 5$-nucleotidase or gamma glutamyl transferase are generally used to
confirm or exclude a liver-specific origin. Once confirmed, liver imaging studies are recommended to complete inital evaluation. Radiologic tests available include
utrasonography (US), CT, radionuclide scans, and MRI.
For biliary obstruction or parenchymal disease, US or
CT are included as a part of the inital evaluation. If a
primary or metastasic liver malignancy is suspected, a
triple-phase CT of the liver is recommended. For the

detection of intrahepatic vascular lesions, a nuclear scan
or MRI of the liver is necessary. Finally, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) is an effective noninvasive imaging technique to evaluate biliary
ductal anatomy.
D. Liver biopsy provides important prognostic and diagnostic information in patients with liver disease. However, it should be performed only if the expected
results exceed the low risks of the procedure. In patients with chronically elevated ("6 months) liver enzymes or with impaired hepatic function, liver biopsy
should be considered. Recent studies have shown that
the most likely diagnosis is steatosis and steatohepatitis
when biopsy is performed for abnormal liver chemistries with unremarkable serologies.
References
Daniel S, Ben-Menachem T, Vasudevan G, et al. Prospective evaluation of
unexplained chronic liver transaminase abnormalities in asymptomatic
and symptomatic patients. Am J Gastroenterol 1999;94(10):3010–3014.
Feldman M, Friedman LS, Sleisenger MH. Biochemical liver test. In
Davern TJ, Scharrschmidt BF, eds. Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease: Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, Management. Vol. 2. Philadelphia:
Saunders, 2002:1227–1239.
Goessling W, Friedman LS. Increased liver chemistry in an asymptomatic
patient. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2005;3(9):852–858.
Green RM, Flam S. AGA Technical review on the evaluation of liver
chemistry tests. Gastroenterology 2002;123(4):1367–1384.
Neuschwander-Tetri BA, Caldwell SH. Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis:
summary of an AASLD Single Topic Conference. Hepatology
2003;37(5):1202–1219.
Pratt DS, Kaplan MM. Evaluation of abnormal liver-enzyme results in
asymptomatic patients. N Engl J Med 2000;342(17):1266–1271.
Sampliner RE. The liver disease of asymptomatic patients with elevated
aminotransferases. Hepatology 1989;10(4):524–525.

225
Negative serology,
asymptomatic patient
without hepatic
decompensation
(Cont’d from p 223)

Lifestyle modification:
Discontinue alcohol
Stop hepatotoxic
medications
Weight loss
Diabetes control

Positive hepatitis A
lgM serology
or
Positive hepatitis B
IgM serology

C Consider ultrasound, ANA,

anti–smooth-muscle Ab,
ceruloplasmin, %1-antitrypsin,
LKM Ab, alkaline phosphatase

6 months

Abnormal
results

Repeat liver
chemistries

Liver biopsy

Normal

Positive serologic
evaluation
(Cont’d from p 223)

Elevated
results

5$-nucleotidase
Gamma glutamyl
transferase

Follow clinically
Serial liver
chemistries

Positive hepatitis C Ab
or
hepatitis B virus–
antigen positive

Abnormal

Observation

C Ultrasound and serologic evaluation:
ANA, anti–smooth-muscle Ab,
ceruloplasmin, %1-antitrypsin,
antigliadin, and antiendomysial Ab

Clinical improvement
Liver chemistries
normalize #6 mo

Observation‡

D Liver biopsy

Persistent liver
chemistries
abnormality
"6 mo

Treat

D Liver biopsy

Elective radiologic and serologic evaluations should be dependent on the clinical scenario specific to an individual patient.
In addition, depending on the clinical scenario, computerized tomography or abdominal magnetic resonance imaging may
be preferable to ultrasonography. Patients with more significant elevations of the ALT or AST, with an abnormal albumin or
prothrombin time, or with evidence of chronic liver disease and/or hepatic decompensation should typically have more
expeditious evaluations.
* When findings from these indicate that one or more diagnostic considerations are likely, subsequent evaluation should be
direct toward establishing these diagnoses.
† HAV–IgM, HBsAg, and Hepatitis B core antibody–IgM fraction (HBclgM), HCV antibody (consider HCV–RNA).
‡ Liver biopsy may considered in patients with chronic HCV viremia and either normal or abnormal serum ALT levels.
Modified from the American Gastroenterological Association. American Gastroenterological Association medical position
statement: Evaluation of liver chemistry tests. Gastroenterology 2002; 123:1364.

