BELCHING

A. Belching, burping, and eructation have roughly the
same meaning and refer to the passage of gas from the
stomach or esophagus through the mouth. In some
patients, belching is the only symptom. In others,
belching may be accompanied by abdominal discomfort, chest pain, or the passage of excess flatus. All
people swallow air in variable amounts, and all people
belch from time to time.
B. Most patients who complain of belching swallow excess amounts of air. In fact, they may unwittingly take
air into the esophagus before each belch that then is
eructated. This practice may be associated with psychological stress or is thought by some patients to relieve other abdominal symptoms. Some patients may
improve simply by being made aware of the cause of
belching and given reassurance that they are otherwise
well. Avoidance of gum chewing and carbonated beverages also is helpful.
C. Occasionally, belching is a sign of organic disease. If
the gastric outlet is obstructed partially by peptic disease or carcinoma, swallowed air cannot pass into the
bowel and eructation may develop, sometimes accompanied by abdominal pain and vomiting. For unexplained reasons, patients who have symptomatic gallstones may complain of belching. Finally, belching of
feculent-smelling gas may indicate prolonged gastric
stasis or a gastrocolic fistula that has developed from a
carcinoma of the stomach or transverse colon.
D. Upper GI x-ray series or upper GI endoscopy is used
to evaluate the stomach for partial gastric outlet obstruction and in rare cases may indicate a gastrocolic

184

fistula complicating a gastric carcinoma. In general,
because gastric outlet obstruction or a carcinoma that
is large enough to erode into the colon is likely to be
diagnosed by an upper GI x-ray series, that study is the
appropriate first step in the diagnostic evaluation of
belching. However, in some patients with peptic disease who have a small ulcer or have erosions and gastritis, the upper GI x-ray series may be nondiagnostic.
In these patients, an upper GI endoscopy may be necessary to confirm the diagnosis.
E. The diagnosis of gallstones and gallbladder disease usually is made by ultrasonography of the upper abdomen.
F. Perform a barium enema if the patient belches foulsmelling gas and if the question of a gastrocolic fistula
remains after a nondiagnostic upper GI x-ray series or
endoscopy.
G. Testing gut motor function may help diagnose a motility disorder, neuropathy, or systemic disease, such as
scleroderma.

References
American Gastroenterological Association website. Gas in the Digestive
Tract. www.gastro.org.
Azpiroz F. Intestinal gas dynamics: mechanisms and clinical relevance.
Gut 2005;54:893.
Hasler WL. Approach to the patient with gas and bloating. In Yamada T,
Alpers DH, Kaplowitz N, et al, eds. Textbook of Gastroenterology, 4th
ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2003:802.
Rao SS. Belching, bloating, and flatulence. How to help patients who
have troublesome abdominal gas. Postgrad Med 1997;101:275.

185
Patient with BELCHING

A History

Physical examination

C Other symptoms or

No other symptoms

signs present:
Abdominal pain
Vomiting
Weight loss
Foul-smelling
belched gas

B Explain process of
air swallowing
Reassure patient

Symptoms
abate

D Upper GI x-ray series

Symptoms
continue

or upper GI endoscopy

No further
evaluation

Normal
findings

Belched gas
(not foul
smelling)

Belched gas
(foul smelling)

F

E Abdominal

ultrasonography

Gallstones

Reassure
patient

Treat
Accordingly

Barium
Enema

Normal
findings

Abnormal
findings

Consider:
Colonoscopy

Treat
Accordingly

No gallstones

G Consider:

Abnormal
findings

Gut motility testing

