BILIARY COLIC

Biliary colic is abdominal pain caused by sudden obstruction of the cystic or common bile duct (CBD). Pain is usually perceived in the right upper quadrant (RUQ) or epigastrium, lasts 15 minutes to several hours, is associated
with vomiting, typically comes on suddenly, and may be
severe. Gallstone disease is the most common cause; however, biliary parasites, infectious agents, blood clots, and
occasionally tumors may cause symptoms. The pain may
be confused with peptic ulcer disease, bowel obstruction,
pancreatitis, urinary calculi, diverticulitis, some metabolic
disorders, or functional bowel disease. A careful history
is critical when evaluating upper abdominal pain because
asymptomatic gallbladder disease and biliary tract dilation
(following cholecystectomy) are very common and a failure
of detection may lead to potentially harmful and ineffective
interventions, including biliary endoscopy and surgery.
A. The initial history should focus on the location, duration, and character of the symptoms as described earlier. There is commonly a history of similar, although
often less severe, symptoms in the past. Although the
association with fatty meals is touted as a classic symptom, this is nonspecific and may not be present. Murphy’s sign (involuntary cessation of respiration with
palpation of the RUQ) may be seen with cholecystitis
but is nonspecific and relatively insensitive in the assessment of biliary colic. Epigastric and RUQ tenderness during an attack is common but again not particularly useful in determining the precise source of the
problem. The WBC count may be normal or slightly
elevated when cholangitis is present but similarly nondiagnostic. Total bilirubin and aminotransferase levels
are mildly elevated in many patients but may be normal
in up to 60%. The combination of elevated liver enzymes and pancreatic enzymes should suggest distal
biliary/proximal pancreatic duct obstruction (usually
from gallstones) until proved otherwise.
B. Abdominal ultrasonography detects gallstones when
present in the gallbladder with an approximately 95%
sensitivity. It is less valuable in detecting stones in the
CBD (15%–25% sensitivity), although a dilated CBD
in the presence of a gallbladder (i.e., no prior cholecystectomy) is seen in about 75% of those with choleclocholithiasis. Other causes of pain, such as pancreatitis
and nephrolithiasis, may also be detected during ultrasonography.
C. Although infrequently used now, oral cholecystography may provide useful information regarding gallbladder function and the presence of stones when
194

ultrasound studies are normal. More commonly, biliary
scintigraphy using radiotracers that are excreted into
the bile are used when there is a high level of suspicion
for continued cystic duct obstruction and ultrasonography is nondiagnostic. There are also some data to support its use to evaluate sphincter of Oddi function;
however, this remain controversial. The use of nuclear
medicine studies is this setting varies widely and
depends on the availability of biliary manometry (see
section E) and should be individualized based on the
clinical scenario.
D. The absence of gallstones in the proper clinical setting
(atypical symptoms and/or normal liver tests and pancreatic enzymes) should prompt the evaluation for
nonbiliary cause such as peptic ulcer or functional
bowel disease. Upper endoscopy (esophagogastroduodenoscopy [EGD]) is a safe and reliable study to exclude peptic ulcer disease and gastroduodenal tumors,
and a side-viewing endoscope should be used when
tumors of the major ampulla are suspected. When liver
tests are abnormal in this setting, magnetic resonance
cholangiopancreatography (MRCP), endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), endoscopic
ultrasonography (EUS), and possibly biliary manometry should be considered to assess for sphincter of
Oddi dysfunction, small CBD stones or “sludge,” or
small tumors or intraductal polypoid lesions that could
cause biliary colic.
E. A history compatible with biliary colic, along with elevated liver tests and no detectable gallbladder pathology, suggests possible CBD obstruction from stones,
sludge (microlithiasis), parasites, or biliary dyskinesia.
ERCP is usually performed in these patients to diagnose
and treat the source of obstruction. EUS can be performed immediately prior to planned ERCP to increase
the therapeutic yield and reduce the number of “diagnostic” ERCPs. In experienced hands EUS is accurate
in detecting or excluding CBD stones in >95% of cases.
Where available, biliary manometry can accurately diagnose sphincter of Oddi dysfunction and direct the performance of sphincterotomy, when indicated.
F. When gallstones are detected on ultrasound within the
gallbladder and liver tests are significantly elevated,
choledocholithiasis should be considered. If liver tests
are falling and there are no signs of cholangitis, cholecystectomy with intraoperative cholangiography (IOC)
is generally recommended. If CBD stones are found
on IOC, then CBD exploration can be performed or
cholecystectomy can be completed, followed by ERCP.

195
Patient with suspected BILIARY COLIC

A History

Laboratory
tests

Physical
examination

B Abdominal ultrasonography

No gallstones

C

Biliary Scintigraphy

F Gallstones

No gallstones

D

EGD

Evidence of
choledocholithiasis

Normal

E

Choledocholithiasis
SPHINCTEROTOMY
and
STONE
EXTRACTION

Ulcer
disease

ERCP
Biliary
Manometry

Biliary
dyskinesia

Specific Therapy

Normal

Functional
pain syndrome

G No evidence of

CBD pathology

ERCP

Choledocholithiasis

ERCP

!
CHOLECYSTECTOMY

Normal

CHOLECYSTECTOMY
or
Gallstone Dissolution

CHOLECYSTECTOMY
and
CBD EXPLORATION

SPHINCTEROTOMY

In centers where experienced biliary endoscopists are
available, the latter is generally performed. When liver
test abnormalities or signs and symptoms of cholangitis
persist, preoperative ERCP to clear the CBD of obstructing stones is recommended.
G. If there are no findings to suggest CBD obstruction,
treatment should be aimed at removing gallstones and
usually a diseased gallbladder. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy is the treatment of choice; however, for high-risk
individuals, high-risk alternatives may be considered.
Gallstone dissolution therapy using oral bile acid supplementation (ursodeoxycholic acid) is effective in only a
highly selected population (small and few stones and a
functioning gallbladder) and not commonly used. Gallbladder puncture and infusion with organic solvents may
effectively dissolve gallstones but is experimental and
leaves behind a diseased gallbladder. Image-guided percutaneous cholecystectomy with transcutaneous catheter
drainage performed by interventional radiologists can be

a lifesaving procedure for patients in whom surgery is
considered too risky.

References
Chan YL, Chan AC, Lam WW, et al. Choledocholithiasis: comparison of
MR cholangiography and endoscopic retrograde cholangiography.
Radiology 1996;200:85.
Chatziioannou S, Moore W, Ford P, Dhekne R. Hepatobiliary scintigraphy is superior to abdominal ultrasonography in suspected acute cholecystitis. Surgery 2000;127:609.
Fidler J, Paulson E, Layfield L. CT evaluation of acute cholecystitis:
findings and usefulness in diagnosis. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1996;
166:1085.
Jaffe P. Gallstones: who are good candidates for nonsurgical therapy?
Postgrad Med 1993;94:45.
Lai E, Mok F, Tan E. Endoscopic biliary drainage for severe acute cholangitis. N Engl J Med 1992;326:1582.
Marton K, Doublilet P. How to image the gallbladder in suspected cholecystitis. Ann Intern Med 1988;109:722.
Tzovaras G, Rowlands BJ. Diagnosis and treatment of sphincter of Oddi
dysfunction. Br J Surg 1998;85:588.

