BRADYCARDIA



Bradycardia can be physiologic, pathologic, or pharmacologic in origin. Alteration of either the sinoatrial (SA) or
atrioventricular (AV) conduction system may play a role.
Symptoms of bradyarrhythmias include fatigue, dizziness or
syncope, and dyspnea and angina.
A. In the general population, heart rates in approximately
25% of men and 10% of women drop below 50 beats
per minute (bpm) during sleep as a result of enhanced
nocturnal parasympathetic tone. Sinus pauses up to
2 seconds in asymptomatic individuals can be considered normal. Conditioned athletes often can have
high resting vagal tone during the day. During periods
of heightened vagal tone, sinus bradycardia, sinus
pauses, and first- and second-degree Mobitz type I
(Wenckebach) AV block are commonly reported and
generally have a benign prognosis. The identification
of sinus slowing with AV block in the appropriate
setting is characteristic of vagal hypersensitivity.
B. Degenerative disease of the AV node is one of the
leading causes of progressive AV block. This degenerative process of the conduction system may be
primary (Lenègre’s disease) or secondary as a result of
impingement by surrounding fibrosis or calcification
(Lev’s disease).
A large number of systemic diseases are associated
with bradyarrhythmias. Hypothermia, hypoglycemia,
hypercarbia, and hypothyroidism produce slow heart
rhythms because of metabolic alteration. Electrolyte
disorders (e.g., hyperkalemia) can result in both SA and
AV node disorders. Myocarditis can be associated with
both SA and AV node disease and generally portends a
poor prognosis. Lyme myocarditis associated with conduction system disease, however, often resolves in the
acute setting with appropriate antibiotic therapy. Endocarditis with complicating annular abscess may lead to
AV block. Accelerated conduction system disease may

also result from infiltrative diseases such as amyloidosis
and hemochromatosis.
With inferior myocardial infarction (MI), sinus bradycardia and second-degree Mobitz type I (Wenckebach) AV block are not uncommon. Vagal tone is often
high, and heart block is generally located at the level of
the AV node because of the anatomy of the AV nodal
artery. Consequently, the block tends to be reversible,
with a narrow escape (QRS !120 msec). In contrast,
the infranodal conduction system gets its blood supply
from the septal branches of the left anterior descending
artery. AV block with an anterior MI tends to be infranodal and may be associated with bundle branch
block. The escape rhythm is often wide (QRS "120
msec) and unreliable, and permanent pacing is generally required.
Postoperative aortic or mitral valve replacement is
associated with both mechanical disruption and inflammation that may cause AV block. Because heart
block may result from edema, implementation of permanent pacing should be delayed for a minimum of
4 days to allow for any recovery of conduction that
may occur.
The finding of atrial fibrillation with a slow ventricular response in the absence of drug therapy may be
indicative of SA node dysfunction and susceptibility for
offset pauses.
C. Diltiazem and verapamil slow conduction of the AV
node. Both blockade and withdrawal of sympathetic
tone with beta blockers slow AV nodal conduction via
a vagotonic effect. Digoxin increases vagal tone and
has a direct effect on AV nodal physiology. Amiodarone and propafenone act through antagonism of
[Ca2#] channels and beta receptors. Alternatively,
quinidine, procainamide, and disopyramide act via
[Na#] channels and thereby can affect the infranodal
conducting system.
(Continued on page 58)

56

57
Patient with BRADYCARDIA
ECG

History
Physical examination

A Physiologic:

Conditioning
Parasympathetic tone

B Pathologic:

Degenerative disease
Systemic disease
Associated with ischemia
Postoperative (valve surgery)
Associated tachycardia

Identified mechanism
Cont’d on p 59

C Pharmacologic:

Nondihydropyridine
Ca2# channel blockers
Beta blockers
Digitalis glycosides
Antiarrhythmics

58
D. The presence of symptoms often guides the workup. It
is important to identify patients at high risk based on acuity of onset and potential for comorbidities. Evaluation
should include a full 12-lead ECG; a baseline echocardiogram; and stress testing to identify baseline conduction system disease, structural heart disease, and potential for myocardial ischemia. For those with suspected
chronotropic incompetence, a treadmill ECG may be of
additional diagnostic value. For evaluation of suspected
vagally mediated conduction disorders, carotid sinus
massage (CSM), used judiciously in the elderly, may reproduce findings. Ambulatory ECG recording may be
necessary, either 24-hour continuous Holter monitoring
for those with frequent symptoms or triggered loop recording for 2–4 weeks for those with less frequent symptoms. One clinical trial suggests that empiric pacemaker
implantation may be of value in elderly patients with
carotid sinus hypersensitivity and a history of nonmechanical fall. In the absence of documented carotid sinus
hypersensitivity, the evidence for empiric permanent
pacing is less clear.
Electrophysiology testing can be used to determine
the intrinsic heart rate, measure SA node automaticity (corrected sinus node recovery time, or cSNRT),
sinoatrial conduction time (SACT), AV node conduction, and refractoriness. Invasive testing for bradyarrhythmias has a low diagnostic yield, with a sensitivity
of 20%–75%, and therapies should be guided by
patient symptoms.
E. In general, asymptomatic sinus bradycardia, sinus
pauses, and first-degree AV block require no treatment.
An exception is made to allow medical therapy for
coexistent tachyarrhythmias. Second-degree Mobitz
type I (Wenckebach) AV block often involves the AV
node and carries a benign prognosis. Mobitz type II AV
block is most often infranodal (within the bundle of
His or the fascicles), is associated with fixed distal
conduction system disease, and is likely to progress
to complete heart block. Temporary followed by
permanent pacing is recommended.
A 2:1 AV block can be in the AV node or in the distal
conduction system. Prolongation of the PR interval with
a narrow QRS complex suggests AV nodal block, whereas
a wide complex QRS suggests distal conduction system
disease. Third-degree AV block can be either congenital
or acquired. A narrow escape can suggest that the location of the block is at the AV node (!50%) or the bundle
of His (!50%). In cases with a wide escape, the block is
usually infranodal (!80%), less stable, and in the rate of
30–45 bpm. Treatment with permanent pacemaker
placement is recommended for patients with all forms of
infranodal block, regardless of symptom status.
F. Management of bradycardia involves not only identification of symptoms and etiology but also the acuity of
presentation.
Acutely, in cases of suspected AV node involvement,
treat with atropine. Be aware that atropine may
appear to worsen conduction in infranodal block.

Temporary transvenous pacing can be performed using a balloon-tipped catheter at the bedside or using a
fixed catheter under fluoroscopic guidance. The indications for temporary pacing include both temporary
treatment of reversible causes of symptomatic bradycardia and backup availability in those cases with high
risk for development of complete heart block. Similarly, transcutaneous pacing may be used as an emergency method of pacing for symptomatic bradycardia.
Early conversion to a transvenous system should be
considered given discomfort of transcutaneous pacing
and risk of intermittent noncapture. Note that temporary pacing has been shown to be ineffective in asystolic cardiac arrest and is not indicated.
In some patients, a beta blocker with intrinsic sympathomimetic activity (e.g., acebutolol, pindolol) may be of
value in treating tachyarrhythmia with less bradyarrhythmia side effects. Because pharmacologic therapy for
chronic conduction defects does not exist, the treatment
of choice is either a temporary pacemaker for reversible
causes or permanent pacemaker placement.
In many cases, permanent pacemaker implantation
is considered for irreversible conditions, independent
of the etiology. The serious risks of contemporary
pacemaker implantation, a minor surgical procedure,
are !1%. Because the endocardial leads are placed in
the central venous circulation, it is critical that the patient be free of infection (e.g., urinary tract infections)
prior to implantation because extraction of infected
devices can have significant morbidity. At the time of
consideration of pacing, thought must be given to the
role of biventricular pacing (to improve symptoms with
heart failure). A defibrillator (to reduce mortality) may
be advisable if the patient has a depressed ejection
fraction. Consultation with an electrophysiologist, implanting cardiologist, or surgeon familiar with current
methodology is encouraged.

References
Brodsky M, Wu D, Denes P, et al. Arrhythmias documented by 24 hour
continuous electrocardiographic monitoring in 50 male medical students without apparent heart disease. Am J Cardiol 1977;39:390–395.
Cummins RO, Graves JR, Larsen MP, et al. Out-of-hospital transcutaneous pacing by emergency medical technicians in patients with asystolic
cardiac arrest. N Engl J Med 1993;328:1377–1382.
Johnson RL, Averill KH, Lamb LE. Electrocardiographic findings
in 67,375 asymptomatic subjects. VII. Atrioventricular block. Am J
Cardiol 1960;6:153–177.
Kenny RA, Richardson DA, Steen N, et al. Carotid sinus syndrome: a
modifiable risk factor for nonaccidental falls in older adults (SAFE
PACE). J Am Coll Cardiol 2001;38:1491–1496.
Koplan BA, Stevenson WG, Epstein LM, et al. Development and validation of a simple risk score to predict the need for permanent pacing
after cardiac valve surgery. J Am Coll Cardiol 2003;41:795–801.
Reiffel JA, Schwarzberg R, Murry M. Comparison of autotriggered
memory loop recorders versus standard loop recorders versus 24-hour
Holter monitors for arrhythmia detection. Am J Cardiol 2005;95:
1055–1059.
Strickberger SA, Fish RD, Lamas GA, et al. Comparison of effects of
propranolol versus pindolol on sinus rate and pacing frequency in sick
sinus syndrome. Am J Cardiol 1993;71:53–56.

59
Identified mechanism
(Cont’d from p 60)

No

Yes

D Noninvasive testing
Invasive testing

Treat reversible causes
Discontinue offending drugs

Continued symptoms

No

E Assess risk for progression

Yes

F Medical management
Device management
(i.e., pacemaker)

