BRAIN DEATH

Molleret and Goulon introduced the term brain death
in 1959, when they described 23 patients with “irreversible coma” involving unresponsiveness, loss of brainstem
reflexes and spontaneous respiration, and flat EEGs.
Advances in mechanical ventilation have enabled survival
of systemic organ functioning after devastating neurologic
injury, thereby creating the possibility for the person’s brain
to be “dead” or nonfunctional, while the systemic organs
are still viable if supported by external means. In 1981,
the President’s Commission for the Study of Ethical Problems in Medicine and Biomedical and Behavioral Research
issued a report on “Guidelines for the Determination of
Death.” This included a model statute called the Uniform
Determination of Death Act, which stated: “An individual
who has sustained either (1) irreversible cessation of circulatory and respiratory functions, or (2) irreversible cessation
of all functions of the entire brain, including the brain stem,
is dead. A determination of death must be made in determination with accepted medical standards.” The correct
determination of brain death is essential in medical care to
ensure that inappropriate measures are not undertaken, to
provide finality for families concerned with prognosis, and
for possible organ donation. Most states now have statutes
or judicial decisions recognizing this concept. However, significant local variations in guidelines exist, and at present individual hospitals are responsible for developing their own
guidelines. The following is a description of the necessary
requirements for determination of death by brain criteria
in adults.
A. The cause of brain dysfunction must be known and
must be known to be irreversible. Neuroimaging is
often required to establish the cause radiographically
and to exclude potentially treatable conditions. There
must be no confounding medical conditions that may
influence the clinical examination, including severe
electrolyte disturbances, acid–base disorders, elevated
ammonia level, or endocrine disorders—particularly,
profound hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism or
severe cortisol deficiency. Body temperature must be
!96.8° F (36.5° C). The systolic blood pressure must
be maintained !90 mm Hg. There must be no evidence of drug intoxication, poisoning, or recent use of
neuromuscular blocking agents. The barbiturate level
must be "10 #g/ml. If significant doses of CNS
depressant medications (e.g., narcotics, sedatives, hypnotics, anticholinergics) have been administered
recently, the reliability of the clinical examination
should be questioned and ancillary testing should be
464

performed. There should be a demonstrated absence
of neuromuscular blockade (e.g., with a method of four
nerve stimulation) if the patient has received recent or
prolonged use of neuromuscular blocking agents. In
the presence of confounding variables, brain death
may still be determined with the aid of ancillary tests.
B. The three cardinal findings in clinical brain death are
coma, absence of brainstem reflexes, and apnea. Coma
is defined as the absence of any cerebrally mediated
response to noxious stimuli, including pain in all
extremities. Brainstem reflexes should include the
following:
• Pupils—no response to bright light (a magnifying
glass may be useful if response is questionable).
Small or pinpoint pupils should alert the clinician to
the possibility of narcotic intoxication but can also be
seen with pontine damage.
• Ocular movement—no oculocephalic reflex (“doll’s
eyes”—tested only when the integrity of the cervical
spine is ensured) and no oculovestibular reflex (“cold
calorics”). Testing may be confounded by blood or
cerumen in the auditory canal, a disrupted tympanic
membrane, or injury to the globes or orbits.
• Facial motor response—no corneal response, no jaw
jerk reflex, no facial grimacing to noxious stimuli.
Facial myokymias, resulting from denervation of the
facial nerve, are permissible.
• Pharyngeal and tracheal reflexes—no response to
stimulation of the posterior pharynx with pressure,
no coughing or significant bradyarrhythmia to bronchial suctioning.
• Motor response to pain—no purposeful or posturing
(extensor or flexor) movements to noxious stimuli
(e.g., nail bed pressure). Deep tendon reflexes are
permissible because they are spinally mediated.
Apnea testing requires hemodynamic stability; if the
patient is not stable, then ancillary testing should be
performed. The patient should have correction of the
pH (7.35–7.45) and Pco2 (35–45) at least 20 minutes
prior to testing if possible. The patient should be preoxygenated with 100% Fio2 for at least 5 minutes prior
to testing to an arterial Po2 of $200 mm Hg. (This is to
ensure that the patient does not become hypoxic at any
time during testing.) Ensure proper functioning of a
pulse oximeter. Provide an oxygen source (typically via
a catheter to the endotracheal tube to the level of the
carina with a continuous flow of oxygen). Disconnect
the ventilator, and observe closely for respiratory movements, cyanosis, or hemodynamic instability. If any of

465
Patient with Suspected BRAIN DEATH
Deep coma with unresponsiveness and unreceptiveness

A Reversible causes of cerebral depression
(hypothermia, hypoglycemia, severe
electrolyte disturbance, depressant
medications) not present

No voluntary or reflex movement to pain or other stimuli
No decorticate or decerebrate posturing
(Deep tendon reflexes may be preserved)
No motor responses within cranial nerve distribution
Pupils do not respond to light
No corneal reflex
No vestibuloocular reflex
No gag reflex or reflex response to pharyngeal stimulation

B Respiration is absent
C Ancillary studies:

EEG
Cerebral radionuclide angiography
Transcranial Doppler ultrasonography

Brain death
confirmed

these occur, the test should be aborted. If not, after
8 minutes an ABG measurement is drawn and the
patient is reconnected to the ventilator. The apnea test
is positive if the pH is %7.30 (from a pretest baseline of
$7.40) or Pco2 increases from 40 to $60 mm Hg, or if
there is a 20 mm Hg increase from the pretest baseline.
If the test is indeterminate, ancillary testing may be
required.
C. Brain death is a clinical diagnosis and does not require
ancillary testing, unless the clinical examination cannot
be performed or is considered unreliable. Ancillary
studies include cerebral angiography, single photon
emission computed tomography (SPECT), EEG, or
transcranial Doppler ultrasound.
Pitfalls in brain death testing include severe facial
trauma; preexisting pupillary abnormalities; sleep apnea
or severe pulmonary disease resulting in severe chronic

retention of CO2; or toxic levels of any sedative drugs,
including aminoglycosides, tricyclic antidepressants,
anticholinergics, antiepileptic drugs, chemotherapeutic
agents, or neuromuscular blocking agents.
References
Greer DM. Brain death. In Layon AJ, Gabrielli A, Friedman WA, eds.
Textbook of Neurointensive Care. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2004.
Guidelines for the determination of death: report of the medical consultants on the diagnosis of death to the President’s Commission for the
Study of Ethical Problems in Medicine and Biomedical and Behavioral Research. JAMA 1981;246:2184–2186.
Quality Standards Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology. Practice parameters for determining brain death in adults
(summary statement). Neurology 1995;45:1012–1014.
Wijdicks EFM. Brain Death. Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams &
Wilkins, 2001.
Wijdicks EFM. The diagnosis of brain death. N Engl J Med 2001;
344:1215–1221.

