BREAST MASS

Breast cancer is the most common malignancy and the
second leading cause of cancer-related death among U.S.
women. The most effective means for diagnosing early
breast cancer is screening mammography in combination with physical examination. Nonpalpable breast lesions
(detectable only by mammography) may represent small,
early, and potentially curable cancers. Because mammography cannot provide a specific diagnosis for breast
lesions, biopsies are often required to determine whether
a mass is benign or malignant. More than 1 million breast
biopsies are performed in the United States annually;
11%–36% of biopsies performed for mammographically
identified nonpalpable abnormalities are positive. The
use of percutaneous fine needle aspiration (FNA) or
core needle biopsy (CNB) for palpable breast masses, or
stereotactic- or sonography-guided CNB for nonpalpable
masses, may reduce the expense and morbidity associated
with the diagnostic workup of breast lesions and decrease
the number of open breast biopsies for benign lesions (see
also Gynecomastia, p 162).
A. Needle aspiration of breast masses that feel benign
should be a routine part of the evaluation of breast
masses. It is safe, is cost-effective, and immediately
helps distinguish cystic from solid masses. It can be
performed with an 18- to 22-gauge needle with local
anesthesia. Nonbloody fluid can be discarded without
being sent to the laboratory for pathologic study. A
persistent mass or bloody fluid mandates excisional
biopsy to rule out malignancy.
B. Diagnostic mammography is indicated (1) for breast
signs or symptoms (pain, mass, discharge, thickening,
skin or nipple retraction, nipple eczema), (2) before
breast surgery (biopsy, augmentation, reduction),
(3) as routine follow-up of a patient with previous
breast cancer (all remaining breast tissue), and (4) for
metastatic cancer of unknown primary site. Preoperative mammography is performed (1) to characterize a
lesion as obviously benign (lipoma, oil cyst, calcified
fibroadenoma) or malignant (to plan the surgical approach), (2) to determine the size and extent of the
lesion for adequate excision and treatment selection
(especially important in a patient for whom conservative surgery and irradiation are being considered because multicentric disease in the affected breast is a
contraindication to this procedure), (3) to detect additional lesions in the ipsilateral or contralateral
breast, and (4) to obtain a baseline for comparison
598

with follow-up mammography. It is important to recognize that mammograms may be negative even
when breast cancer is obviously present. Thus a negative mammogram does not replace the need for biopsy of a palpable mass.
C. For palpable breast masses, percutaneous FNA or
CNB can be performed with local anesthesia. To evaluate nonpalpable masses, CNB can be guided with
stereotactic mammography or sonographic images.
The accuracy of these procedures is !90%. If needle
biopsy shows a breast mass to be benign, conservative
follow-up with physical examination and mammography can be instituted, obviating the need for further
surgical intervention. If a needle biopsy is positive,
surgical excision can be planned to cure or stage the
patient with a single surgical procedure.
D. Many authors have suggested that because of the possibility of a false-negative FNA, all palpable masses
should undergo excisional biopsy. In one study using
physical examination, mammography, and FNA followed by excisional biopsy for confirmation of pathology, patients who had negative or benign findings on all
three clinical tests (physical examination, mammography, and FNA) also had benign surgical pathologic
conditions. This has led to the recommendation for
clinical and mammographic observation rather than
surgical excision when these criteria are fulfilled.
E. When breast malignancy is confirmed histologically, a
routine outpatient workup to exclude distant metastasis is indicated. Complete physical examination, CBC,
liver function tests (LFTs), and chest x-ray (CXR) are
routinely performed. A preoperative bone scan is indicated only if the patient has symptoms that are suspicious for bony metastasis. CT of the liver is indicated
only if the LFT results are abnormal. The AJC-UICC
staging system for breast cancer has been modified
recently. Clinical staging includes careful inspection
and palpation of the skin, breast, and lymph nodes
(axillary, supraclavicular, and cervical) and pathologic
examination of the breast or other tissues to establish
the diagnosis of breast carcinoma. Pathologic staging
includes data used for clinical staging, surgical resection, and a pathologic examination of the primary carcinoma. Pathologic staging can now be performed if
the primary tumor is removed with no growth tumor in
the margins and, in addition, if at least the lowest level
(1) of axillary lymph nodes is resected, rather than all
three levels.

599
Patient with BREAST MASS

Palpable

Nonpalpable (found on
screening mammography)

A Office aspiration

Exclude cyst with breast
ultrasonography

to exclude cyst

C

Cyst

Persistent mass or bloody fluid

Normal examination
after aspiration

B Mammography
Excisional Biopsy

!35 yr old

"35 yr old

Stereotactically or
Sonographically Guided
Core Needle Biopsy (Histology)
to Establish Diagnosis

Solid mass

B Mammography
C Referral to surgery

for consideration of
percutaneous FNA
or CNB

Negative

Positive

Follow-up
mammography
6, 12, and 24
mo after
needle biopsy

E Consider

B Mammography
D Benign lesion
Observation

on examination,
mammography,
and pathology
Observe

E Malignant, suspicious,

preoperative
workup to
exclude distant
metastases:
Physical
examination
CBC
LFTs
CXR

or benign pathology results
with clinically indeterminate
examination

Further Evaluation:
Excisional Biopsy, etc.

SURGICAL INTERVENTION
to Stage/Cure
Referral to
surgery/oncology

References
Bigelow R, Smith R, Goodman PA, et al. Needle localization of nonpalpable breast masses. Arch Surg 1985;120:565.
Brenner RJ, Fajardo LL, Fisher PR, et al. Percutaneous core biopsy of
the breast: effect of operator experience and number of samples on
diagnostic accuracy. AJR 1996;166:341.
Donegan WL. Evaluation of a palpable breast mass. N Engl J Med 1992;
327:937.
Fajardo LL. Cost-effectiveness of stereotactic breast core needle biopsy.
Acad Radiol 1996;3(Suppl 1):S21.
Fajardo LL, Davis JR, Wiens JL, et al. Mammography-guided stereotactic
fine needle aspiration cytology of nonpalpable breast lesions: prospective comparison with surgical biopsy results. AJR 1990;155:977.

Fajardo LL, DeAngelis GA. The role of imaging guided breast biopsy in
the evaluation of mammographically detected abnormalities. Surg
Oncol Clin North Am 1997;6(2):285.
Greene FL, Page DL, Fleming ID, et al., eds. AJCC Cancer Staging
Manual, ed 6. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2002.
Hillner BE, Bear HD, Fajardo LL. Estimating the cost-effectiveness of
stereotactic biopsy for nonpalpable breast abnormalities: a decision
analysis model. Acad Radiol 1996;3:351.
Howard J. Using mammography for cancer control: an unrealized
potential. CA 1987;37:33.
Silverberg E, Borring CC, Squires TS. Cancer statistics, 1990. Cancer
J Clin 1990;40:9.

