CARCINOMA OF UNKNOWN PRIMARY SITE (CUPS)


Carcinoma of unknown primary site (CUPS) is defined as
the presence of documented metastatic cancer without an
established primary tumor. It is a heterogeneous group of
carcinomas; hence, there are no common genetic and phenotypic alterations. In general, CUPS follow an aggressive
pathologic and clinical course with no obvious risk factors.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) and pathologic studies are
used to characterize CUPS (Table 1).
A. The goal of the diagnostic workup is to identify either
the primary site or clinical situations where potentially
curative or effective therapy is available. The optimal
evaluation required to identify an occult primary
carcinoma includes complete history and physical
examination, laboratory studies, critical pathologic review, and appropriate imaging studies (Table 2). The
incidence of CUPS is 7–12 cases per 100,000 in the
United States, accounting for 2.3%–4.2% of cancer in
both sexes. Median age of occurrence is !60 years,
and CUPS is the seventh to eighth most frequent cancer and the fourth most common cause of mortality in
the world. As a group, median survival for CUPS from
diagnosis is approximately 10–12 months.
B. A routine chest x-ray (CXR) is part of the initial evaluation; however, it may be prudent to perform a highresolution CT scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis
for staging. CT scans appear to detect 30%–35% of
primary sites. The FDG-PET (2-[18F] fluoro-2-deoxyd-glucose-positron emission tomography) scan is a
useful modality, particularly for squamous cell tumors
originating in the head and neck areas.

Table 1. CUPS Histologic Types, Frequency,
and Likely Pathobiologic Features
Histologic Types

Frequency(%)

Adenocarcinoma (well to
moderately differentiated)
Adenocarcinoma (poorly
differentiated)

50

Squamous cell carcinoma
Neuroendocrine tumors
Lymphoma
Embryonal/germ cell
tumors
Melanomas and sarcomas

15
1
1
2

270

30

1

Pathobiologic
Features
c-MYC, Ras, Erb-B2, 3p
deletion
Chromosomal instability
(aneuploidy: 70%),
Erb-B2 (11%)
PTH-like factor
t(11;22)
t(8;14)
Isochromosome 1(12)p
or 12p deletion
t(3;13), t(11;22)

Table 2. Diagnostic Studies Used to Evaluate
Patients with CUPS
Diagnostic
Evaluation
History
Physical examination
Biopsy and pathology
(IHC)
Staging and radiology
Endoscopy
Laboratory studies
Serum markers
Special tests

Type of Investigations
Abdominal pain, persistent cough, bleeding
(GI/GU/RS), tobacco/alcohol use, FH
Breast, testicular, pelvic, vulvar, rectal
(prostate, blood), lymph node regions, skin
Fine needle aspiration/core; cytokeratin 7 and
20; histology specific markers (ER/PR, PSA)
CXR, CT scan of abdomen/pelvis, MRI
mammography, FDG-PET
Upper GI (ERCP), lower GI, laryngoscopy,
bronchoscopy, endoscopic ultrasound
CBC with differential and platelets, metabolic
panel (Ca2!, LDH, "2M), urine analysis,
stool analysis
Histology-specific markers (PSA, CA15.3,
CEA, CA27.29, CA125,CA19.9, "-hCG,
#FP, Tgb)
Electron microscopy

Endoscopic evaluations should be directed toward
specific symptoms and signs. Patients with upper respiratory symptoms should be considered for fiberoptic
bronchoscopy, laryngoscopy (direct and indirect), or
both; patients with GI symptoms should be considered
for upper and lower GI endoscopy with random biopsies.
C. An adequate sample of tumor tissue is essential because pathologic examination is the single most important step in determining the primary site. IHC utilizing
antibodies to cytokeratins (7 and 20) may guide in
identifying certain tumor types (Table 3). Other histology specific markers may also be of diagnostic value in
difficult cases (Table 4).

Table 3. Antibodies to Cytokeratins 7 and 20 May
Help in Identifying Certain Tumor Types
7!/20!
Stomach, biliary, pancreas, ovary
(mucinous)
7$/20$
Prostate, kidney, liver

7!/20$
Biliary, pancreas, lung, ovary
(nonmucinous), endometrium
7$/20!
Colon, stomach, ovary (mucinous)

(Continued on page 272)

271
Patient with CUPS

A History

B Radiology/endoscopy

Physical examination

C Pathology

(Laboratory studies/serum markers)

Antibodies to cytokeratins (7 and 20)

7!/20!

Stomach
Biliary
Pancreas
Ovary (mucinous)

7$/20$

7!/20$

Biliary
Pancreas
Lung
Ovary (nonmucinous)
Endometrium

Prostate
Kidney
Liver

IHC markers
Clarify differential diagnosis

Cont’d on p 273

7$/20!

Colon
Stomach
Ovary (mucinous)

272
Table 4. Histology-Specific Markers
May Be of Diagnostic Value
Tumor Type
Carcinoma
Breast
Germ cell
Lymphoma
Lung
Melanoma
Neuroendocrine
Prostate
Sarcoma
Thyroid

Table 5. Predictive and Prognostic Factors
Characterize Favorable from Unfavorable
Groups of CUPS

IHC Marker
Cytokeratins, EMA
Cytokeratins, EMA, ER/PR, Her2/Neu
Cytokeratins, EMA, "hCG, #FP
CLA, EMA (%)
Thyroid transcription factor
S-100, HMB-45, Vimentin, NSE
Chromogranin, synaptophysin, cytokeratin,
EMA, NSE
PSA, PAP, cytokeratin, EMA
Vimentin, desmin, CD117, factor VIII
Thyroglobulin, cytokeratin, calcitonin

Serum markers (prostate: prostate-specific antigen
[PSA]; breast: CA15.3, CA 27.29, carcinoembryonic
antigen [CEA]; lung and colon: CEA; pancreas: CA19.9;
ovarian: CA125; germ cell: "hCG, #FP, liver: #FP; thyroid: thyroglobulin) may be useful adjuncts to pathology
and imaging studies (see Table 2). The most common
epithelial primaries identified by pathology and radiology are lung and pancreatic cancer. Despite extensive
workup, &20% will have a primary site identified. However, postmortem studies report about 70% of cases to
be undiagnosed.
D. A number of predictive and prognostic factors are characterized as significant in distinguishing favorable from
unfavorable groups of CUPS (Table 5). They are certain
histopathologic subsets (poorly differentiated carcinoma,
squamous cell carcinoma, neuroendocrine carcinoma),
number of metastatic lesions (2), female sex, performance status, weight loss, and serum markers (alkaline
phosphatase, lactate dehydrogenase, [LDH], CEA).
E. Disease-specific therapy is indicated for the favorable
CUPS with a potential for a good treatment outcome
(Table 6).
F. However, for unfavorable CUPS, treatment is based
on type 3 level of evidence. Chemotherapy regimens
include platinum, taxol, or gemcitabine- or irinotecanbased combinations. The availability of gene expression profiling and tissue microarrays may help identify
targets for which approved therapies exists (e.g.,
Avastin, Erbitux, or Herceptin) and may be used alone
or in combination with chemotherapy. In general, patients with CUPS should be considered for palliative
treatment options suitable for individual clinical use or
investigational use on an appropriate clinical trial.

Favorable

Unfavorable

Poorly differentiated carcinoma with
midline structures (mediastinum,
retroperitoneum; men &50 years);
extragonadal germ cell sy ndrome
Papillary adenocarcinoma of the
peritoneal cavity (women)
Adenocarcinoma involving only the
axillary lymph nodes (women)
Squamous cell carcinoma involving
cervical lymph nodes
Isolated inguinal adenopathy
(squamous carcinoma)
Poorly differentiated
neuroendocrine carcinoma
Blastic bone metastasis with
elevated PSA
Single small potentially
resectable tumor

Adenocarcinoma metastatic
to the liver or other
organs
Nonpapillary malignant
ascites (adenocarcinoma)
Multiple brain metastases
(adenocarcinoma or
squamous carcinoma)
Multiple lung/pleural
metastases (adenocarcinoma)
Multiple metastatic bone
disease (adenocarcinoma)
—
—
—

Table 6. Treatment Modalities for Favorable CUPS
That Lead to a Good Survival Outcome
Favorable CUPS
Extragonadal germ cell
syndrome
Papillary adenocarcinoma of
the peritoneal cavity
Adenocarcinoma involving
only the axillary lymph
nodes
Squamous cell carcinoma
involving cervical lymph
nodes
Isolated inguinal adenopathy
(squamous carcinoma)
Poorly differentiated
neuroendocrine carcinoma
Blastic bone metastasis with
elevated PSA
Single small potentially
resectable tumor

Treatments
Platinum-based combination
therapy for germ cell tumors
(50% RR; 15%–25% CR)
Surgical debulking followed by
platinum-based combination therapy for stage III ovarian cancer
(OS similar to stage III ovarian)
Breast cancer chemotherapy followed
by XRT and adjuvant hormonal
therapy if ER/PR! (5 year OS
75%)
N1-Neck dissection followed by
XRT N2/3- concurrent chemoXRT (5-year OS 30%–50%)
Lymph node dissection % XRT
(50% long-term survival)
Platinum or Carbo/Taxol or clinical
trial (RR 50%–70%; CR 25%)
Initial treatment: endocrine therapy
Resection % XRT

CR, Complete response; OS, overall survival; RR, response rate;
XRT, external radiation therapy.

273

D IHC markers

Clarify differential diagnosis
(Cont’d from p 271)

Favorable

Unfavorable

Extragonadal germ cell syndrome
Papillary adenocarcinoma of the peritoneal cavity
Adenocarcinoma involving only the axillary lymph nodes
Squamous cell carcinoma involving cervical lymph nodes
Isolated inguinal adenopathy (squamous carcinoma)
Poorly differentiated neuroendocrine carcinoma
Blastic bone metastasis with elevated PSA
Single small potentially resectable tumor

Adenocarcinoma metastatic to the liver or other organs
Nonpapillary malignant ascites (adenocarcinoma)
Multiple brain metastases (adenocarcinoma or
squamous carcinoma)
Multiple lung/pleural metastases (adenocarcinoma)
Multiple bone disease (adenocarcinoma)

E Treatment(s)

Resection

Radiation

F Clinical trials

Chemotherapy

References
Abbruzzese JL, Abbruzzese MC, Hess KR. Unknown primary
carcinoma: natural history and prognostic factors in 657 consecutive
patients. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1272–1280.
Abbruzzese JL, Abbruzzese MC, Lenzi R, et al. Analysis of a diagnostic
strategy for patients with suspected tumors of unknown origin. J Clin
Oncol 1995;13:2094.
Greco FA, Hainsworth JD. Cancer of unknown primary site. In
DeVita TV, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Cancer: Principles and
Practice of Oncology, 4th ed, Philadelphia: JB Lippincott, 1997:
2423–2443.

Lenzi R, Hess KR, Abbruzzese MC, et al. Poorly differentiated carcinoma and poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma of unknown origin:
favorable subsets of patients with unknown primary carcinoma?
J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2056.
Muir C. Cancer of unknown primary site. Cancer 1995;75:353–356.
Pavlidis N, Fizazi K. Carcinoma of unknown primary (CUP). Crit Rev
Oncol Hematol 2005;54:243–250.

