CARDIAC DYSPNEA



Dyspnea, the subjective sensation of breathlessness, is
a common problem in patients with underlying cardiac
disease. Because dyspnea has numerous cardiovascular
and noncardiovascular causes, establishing a definitive diagnosis can be difficult. A thorough initial evaluation with
emphasis on the history, examination, and several key tests
is essential.
Although the pathophysiology responsible for dyspnea
is complex and incompletely understood, most cardiac
causes are attributable to elevations in intracardiac
pressures, pulmonary vascular stretch, and activation of
perivascular nerve fibers.
A. The history and physical examination should first be
aimed at excluding noncardiac causes of dyspnea (pulmonary, musculoskeletal, and neurologic) and then on
establishing the primary location of underlying cardiac
dysfunction (right ventricular [RV] vs. left ventricular
[LV]).
B. Cardiac causes of dyspnea can be conveniently dichotomized into processes with primary RV dysfunction and
those with primary LV dysfuntion.
C. Physical examination findings suggestive of RV dysfunction include elevated jugular venous pressure (JVP), ascites, and lower extremity swelling. In contrast, LV dysfunction with resultant rise in pulmonary venous pressure
is suggested by the presence of pulmonary rales.
D. RV failure can be divided on the basis of pathophysiology
into three distinct categories. These include primary
myocardial RV dysfunction, impairment of RV filling due
to pericardial disease, and inadequate RV output due to
increases in RV afterload.
E. The findings of an RV heave and right-sided extra
heart sounds (S3 or S4) suggest intrinsic RV muscular
dysfunction. Important causes include acute and
chronic ischemia, restrictive cardiomyopathy, and pressure/volume overload due to intracardiac shunts from
congenital and acquired causes.
F. Pericardial diseases resulting in clinical RV failure include pericardial tamponade and constrictive pericardial disease. Pericarditis, inflammation of the pericardium presenting with chest pain exacerbated by lying
supine, pericardial friction rub, and diffuse ST-segment

96

G.

H.

I.

J.

K.

elevation on the ECG, can precipitate pericardial tamponade and set the stage for future constrictive disease.
The presence of distant heart sounds, elevated neck
veins, and systemic hypotension suggests the presence
of a pericardial effusion with the resultant syndrome of
tamponade. A history of pericardial injury with examination findings of RV failure and a pericardial knock
suggest constrictive disease.
The findings of RV dysfunction associated with an
increased P2 component of the S2 and a pulmonary
artery (PA) tap suggest pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). Rare cases of pulmonary hypertension are
attributable to primary disease (PPH), whereas most
PAH is the result of an identifiable concomitant disease. Common causes of secondary PAH include
thromboembolic disease, connective tissue diseases,
HIV infection, and medication side effects.
Dyspnea attributable to primary LV dysfunction is
caused by elevations in pulmonary venous pressures
with resultant vascular stretch and extravascular fluid
shifts impairing gas exchange. These processes are
reflected by the physical examination finding of rales.
Impairment of contraction, relaxation, and left cardiac
valves can underlie this process.
A diffuse and laterally displaced left ventricle with an S3
suggests decreased LV ejection fraction (LVEF) and
dilation of the LV chamber. Dilated cardiomyopathy
most often results from coronary artery disease, but
other insults including toxin exposure, infection, endocrine disorders, long-standing arrhythmia, and chronic
hypertension must be considered.
A normally located and focal point of maximal impluse
(PMI) suggests preserved LVEF. Dyspnea from LV
dysfunction with preserved LV function can result from
intrinsic abnormalities in relaxation (acute ischemia, LV
hypertrophy, and restrictive processes) and from processes that increase LV afterload (hypertensive urgency
and aortic coarctation)
The presence of a murmur is often indicative of valvular pathology. In the dyspneic patient, the finding of a
murmur may be explanatory and should be clarified
with confirmatory examination maneuvers and echocardiography.

97
Patient with CARDIAC DYSPNEA

A Evaluate for potential

Consider noncardiovascular
causes of dyspnea:
Pulmonary
Neurologic
Musculoskeletal

cardiovascular causes:
History and physical examination
ECG/chest x-ray
Echocardiography
Laboratory testing

B Determine primary anatomic
location of dysfunction

C

H LV dysfunction ! RV dysfunction:

D RV dysfunction ! LV dysfunction:
Elevated jugular venous pressure
Ascites
Lower extremity swelling

E RV heave, PA tap

Right-sided S3 or S4

Distant heart
sounds, knock, rub

Rales
Crackles

J Normal PMI, S4

F Pericardial disease:

LVEF normal

I

Diffuse/lateral
PMI, S3

K Murmur

LVEF decreased

Tamponade constriction

Intrinsic RV
dysfunction

Acute RV infarction/
ischemia
Restrictive
cardiomyopathy
Congenital or
acquired left-toright intracardiac
shunts

G RV dysfunction

Primary myocardial
dysfunction:
Prior myocardial infarction
Diffuse cardiomyopathy

secondary to
pulmonary
hypertension

Cor pulmonale:
Thromboembolic
disease
PPH
Pulmonic stenosis
Connective tissue
diseases
HIV
Medications

Increased LV afterload:
Systemic hypertension
Aortic coarctation
Renal artery stenosis

Valvular disease:
Aortic stenosis/insufficiency
Mitral stenosis/regurgitation

Diastolic dysfunction:
Acute ischemia
LV hypertrophy (hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy or
secondary to hypertension,
diabetes mellitus, aortic stenosis)
Restrictive cardiomyopathy

References
Antman EM, Anbe DT, Armstrong PW, et al. ACC/AHA guidelines for
the management of patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction: a
report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Committee to Revise the
1999 Guidelines for the Management of patients with acute myocardial infarction). J Am Coll Cardiol 2004;44(3):E1–E211.
Braunwald E, Antman EM, Beasley JW, et al. ACC/AHA 2002 guideline
update for the management of patients with unstable angina and nonST-segment elevation myocardial infarction—summary article: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association task force on practice guidelines (Committee on the Management
of patients With Unstable Angina). J Am Coll Cardiol 2002;40(7):1366–
1374.

Büller HR, Agnelli G, Hull RD, et al. Antithrombotic therapy
for venous thromboembolic disease: the Seventh ACCP Conference on Antithrombotic and Thrombolytic Therapy. Chest
2004;126(3 Suppl):401S–428S.
Hunt SA, Abraham WT, Chin MH, et al. ACC/AHA 2005 guideline
update for the diagnosis and management of chronic heart failure in
the adult: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Writing Committee to Update the 2001 Guidelines for the Evaluation and Management of Heart Failure). Developed in collaboration with the
American College of Chest Physicians and the International Society
for Heart and Lung Transplantation: endorsed by the Heart Rhythm
Society. Circulation 2005;112(12):e154–e235.

