CAUSTIC INGESTION AND EXPOSURE

Caustics, a category of chemicals, have the potential to
cause tissue injury or burn on contact, with the most commonly ingested caustic agent being an alkali. Most caustic
ingestions occur in children and are unintentional. When
they do occur in adults, they are typically the result of a
suicide attempt, psychiatric illness, or intoxication. Storage
of caustic agents in atypical containers such as soda cans or
water bottles is the cause of many ingestions. Although the
severe mouth pain caused by ingesting caustics often limits
ingestions to small quantities, one mouthful can be enough
to cause serious injury or even death.
The most significant and acute emergency is the development of laryngeal edema, which may necessitate tracheal
intubation for airway protection, and esophageal or gastric
perforation, which can rapidly progress to systemic shock.
Caustic exposure to skin most typically results in a burn
and is commonly referred to as a chemical burn. Most
chemical burns are the result of direct damage to the skin
from a chemical reaction, although some may cause a
burn secondary to an exothermic chemical reaction often
precipitated by exposure to water.
A. An important component of the initial evaluation, after
airway, breathing, and circulation, is to note the time of
ingestion in relation to the last meal and the type, form,
and concentration of substance ingested if possible.
Alkali are commonly found in lye, drain cleaners, oven
cleaners, Clinitest tablets, and button batteries; acids
are found in swimming pool cleaners, rust removers,
and battery acid.
Almost half of patients with caustic ingestion will report ingesting only a very small amount of chemical, yet
up to 20% of these patients will have esophageal injury
on endoscopy. Larger ingestions may present with signs
and symptoms of airway and respiratory compromise
and esophageal perforation and may present with the
relatively late findings of mediastinitis: respiratory distress, subcutaneous emphysema, and shock.
B. Alkali burns cause liquefaction necrosis in the esophagus, involving the mucosa, submucosa, and longitudinal
muscle. The stomach is affected in 20% of cases.
C. Alkali burns to the cornea are an ophthalmologic
emergency and require continuous irrigation for at

640

D.

E.

F.
G.

H.

I.

J.

least 3 hours, instillation of antibiotics, and emergent
ophthalmologic consultation.
If the patient has ingested a battery, or if there is any
suspicion that a battery has been ingested, the entire
GI tract should be evaluated with radiographs. Symptoms of battery ingestion include vomiting, refusal
to eat, increased salivation, and pain on swallowing.
Emetics are contraindicated.
Cathartics may be administered to facilitate evacuation;
emesis should not be attempted. Endoscopic removal is
indicated if the battery does not pass in 36–48 hours or
if the patient develops symptoms.
Acids cause coagulation necrosis with eschar formation
and mainly affect the stomach, leading to pylorospasm
and eventual full-thickness necrosis and perforation.
Patients who have ingested an alkali or battery and
have a reliable history, no symptoms, and a normal
physical examination can be monitored in the emergency department or observation unit and discharged
after 3–4 hours as long as they remain asymptomatic.
Acid ingestion poses a higher risk of perforation, and
all such patients should be admitted.
First-degree burns cause hyperemia with superficial
mucosal desquamation; second-degree burns cause
blistering and shallow ulcers; third-degree burns suggest total loss of esophageal epithelium.
Treatment of esophageal burns with steroids is not
universally agreed to result in better outcomes, but
many centers advocate using steroids in second-degree
esophageal burns. It generally is accepted that patients
with first-degree burns rarely develop esophageal strictures; patients with third-degree burns develop strictures regardless of steroid treatment. Steroids may
delay stricture development in those with seconddegree burns and should be used with an antibiotic to
offset the increase in infection rate caused by steroid
use. The dose of methylprednisone is 2 mg/kg/day; 1 g
ampicillin every 6 hours or 100 mg/kg every 24 hours
in children may be used.
Hydrofluoric (HF) acid deserves special mention. It is
an agent that rarely can be found in household substances but is commonly used in industry. Minimal
exposures can cause very significant morbidity and

641
CAUSTIC INGESTION AND EXPOSURE Suspected

A History
B Alkali
C Eye exposure

F Acid

Liquid or
solid ingestion

J HF acid

G Liquid or

solid ingestion

D Battery ingestion
Irrigate
Antibiotics
Ophthalmologic
consultation

E

Nasogastric Intubation
Gastric Suction

X-ray film of
entire GI tract

K

Monitor and
discharge after
3– 4 hr if
asymptomatic
Endoscopic
Removal from
Stomach after
48 hr

Ingestion

Skin burn
Local 10%
Calcium
Gluconate

M

L

Oral
Calcium or
Magnesium
Salts

Cardiac Monitoring
Burn Care

Admit for observation

H First-degree

Second-degree
burn

Third-degree
burn

Daily Methylprednisone
2 mg/kg with Antibiotics

Monitor for
perforation

burn

I

mortality because it dissociates in tissue and affects
metabolism by liquefaction necrosis, bone destruction,
and production of insoluble salts. Inhalation exposures
to concentrated HF for 5 minutes usually are fatal.
K. Initial management for HF burns after decontamination
is directed at deactivating the fluoride ion. For severe
burns, inject intradermally 10% calcium gluconate into,
and for a distance of 0.5 cm around, the burn. For mild
to moderate burns, apply calcium gluconate gel locally.
For more diffuse burns, arterial injection of calcium
gluconate may be indicated.
L. For unknown amounts of HF acid ingestion, administer 300 ml magnesium citrate. If the concentration
of HF acid is known, administer oral magnesium on
a milliequivalent-for-milliequivalent basis.

M. Monitor the QT interval for signs of hypocalcemia and
make frequent evaluations of acid-base status, electrolytes, and calcium.
References
Mandell DL. Traumatic emergencies involving the pediatric airway. Clin
Pediatr Emerg Med 2005;6(1):41–48.
Newton E. Surgical complications of selected gastrointestinal emergencies:
pitfalls in management of the acute abdomen. Emerg Med Clin North
Am 2003;21(4):873–907, viii.
Poley JW. Ingestion of acid and alkaline agents: outcome and prognostic
value of early upper endoscopy. Gastrointest Endosc 2004;60(3):
372–377.
Wax PM, Schneider SM. In Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds.
Rosen’s Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice, 6th ed.
St Louis: Mosby, 2002:2115.

