CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM INFECTION
IN THE PATIENT WITH HIV


A. A CNS infection may be the initial presentation for patients who are not aware of their HIV status or for individuals with HIV who are not receiving medical care.
Initial evaluation should include review of CD4 count
and any history of opportunistic infection. If focal findings are present, or if the patient has clinical evidence of
increased intracranial pressure such as lethargy, imaging
should be performed as soon as possible. Focal lesions
may represent surgical emergencies. Prompt initiation of
corticosteroids should be considered if there is evidence
of significant elevation in intracranial pressure. If no
mass effect is detected on imaging, a lumbar puncture
(LP) should be performed.
B. If a lesion with mass effect is present, toxoplasmosis or
primary CNS lymphoma is at the top of the differential.
In those with appropriate risk factors, tuberculosis (TB)
should be considered. Gliomas and metastatic malignancy are two noninfectious possibilities.
Patients with CNS toxoplasmosis generally have a
positive serum Toxoplasma antibody and a CD4 count
!100 cells/ml. The lesions are often multiple and ringenhancing. MRI is more sensitive than CT scan for
small lesions. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination
can be consistent with aseptic meningitis, and Giemsa
stain of centrifuged CSF samples can occasionally
demonstrate organisms. CSF polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for Toxoplasma gondii may also be helpful
in making the diagnosis.
C. In patients who are clinically stable, have radiographic
findings consistent with CNS toxoplasmosis, have a positive Toxoplasma serology, and have not been receiving
appropriate Toxoplasma prophylaxis (e.g., trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole or atovaquone), it is reasonable to initiate empiric treatment for toxoplasmosis with pyrimethamine and either sulfadiazine (preferred) or clindamycin.
Marked improvement or resolution should be seen on
follow-up imaging within 10–14 days. If no such improvement is evident, an alternative diagnosis should be
sought and brain biopsy may become necessary.
Primary CNS lymphoma can present with solitary
or multiple lesions that may or may not enhance.

326

Most patients will have a subacute course and a CD4
count !50 cells/ml. A CSF sample should be sent for
cytology and may yield a diagnosis; although these lymphomas are associated with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV),
EBV PCR from CSF has had variable sensitivity and
specificity and should not be relied on diagnostically.
D. Possible causes of lesions seen on CT or MRI without
mass effect include progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML), HIV encephalopathy, and cytomegalovirus (CMV) encephalitis. PML is caused by reactivation
of JC virus in severe immunosuppression; patients usually have CD4 count !200 cells/ml. It presents with
progressive neurologic deficits and multifocal areas of
demyelination. MRI is more sensitive than CT scan for
lesions. It can be diagnosed by CSF PCR for JCV.
CMV encephalitis occurs in the setting of viral reactivation when a patient’s CD4 count is !50 cells/ml
(sometimes higher). Imaging is highly variable. CMV
can present with encephalitis, myelitis, polyradiculitis—
manifesting as lower extremity weakness, decreased
reflexes, and urinary retention—or as neuropathy that
may affect peripheral nerves, including the cranial
nerves. CSF examination can be consistent with aseptic meningitis. Diagnosis is made by detecting CMV
DNA or CMV antigens in the CSF or by peripheral
nerve biopsy.
Primary HIV infection itself can cause a selflimited meningoencephalitis, sometimes accompanied by fever, headache, vomiting, and cranial nerve
palsies. HIV encephalopathy occurs in later stages of
infection, generally with a CD4 count !200 cells/ml.
Patients can present with some combination of
cognitive, behavioral, and motor problems. On MRI,
the lesions of HIV encephalopathy are usually more
symmetric and are less well demarcated than those
seen in PML. Elevated protein and a pleocytosis are
found in the CSF. The CSF HIV-1 viral load is usually elevated ("1000 copies/ml). Because the signs
and symptoms overlap with so many other
potential etiologies, HIV encephalopathy should be a
diagnosis of exclusion.
(Continued on page 328)

327
HIV-Positive Patient with Suspected CNS INFECTION

A History, physical and detailed
neurologic examination

Focal signs, seizures,
altered mental status

Nonfocal examination

CT scan

Lesion

B Mass effect

No lesion

D No mass effect

Consider JCV, CMV,
HIV, and others below

Lumbar puncture and
appropriate tests based on
epidemiology/history

Empiric steroids

Positive Toxoplasma
serology, not receiving
Toxoplasma prophylaxis

C Empiric

Toxoplasma
therapy

CSF flow cytometry
or cytology suggestive
of lymphoma
Negative Toxoplasma serology,
receiving Toxoplasma prophylaxis,
or has other risk factors

If no response
after 10 –14 days

Consider brain
biopsy

Normal

Abnormal

Watchful waiting

Cont’d on p 329

328
E. If the previously listed investigations remain unrevealing, then consider other infections. There has been a
recent increase in the incidence of syphilis among
those also at risk of HIV infection, and neurosyphilis
has myriad clinical presentations. In patients with HIV,
a CD4 count of #350 cells/ml and a serum rapid
plasma reagin (RPR) titer of $1:32 has been shown to
correlate with significantly increased odds of neurosyphilis. Rarely, neurosyphilis may present with a focal
lesion (gumma). CSF examination can be consistent
with aseptic meningitis. CSF VDRL has a high specificity but low sensitivity; antibody tests specific for
Treponema pallidum may prove to be more sensitive.
F. Cryptococcal infection of the CNS can present with
meningitis and rarely with a local lesion. Patients can
present with fever and headache while lacking other
signs of meningeal irritation. The CSF is generally
found to have low glucose, high protein, and a pleocytosis. Cryptococcal antigen can be detected by agglutination from the CSF, and diagnosis can be confirmed
by detection of the organism by India ink stain and
culture.
G. Mass lesions may also represent brain abscesses from
a variety of organisms, including Staphylococcus,
Nocardia, and Rhodococcus, among many others.
H. Cysticercosis should be considered in patients from
Central and South America, Asia, and sub-Saharan

Africa, particularly if they spent a significant amount of
time in rural areas, had contact with pigs, or consumed
undercooked pork products.
I. Patients with HIV also remain at risk for bacterial and
aseptic meningitis seen in immunocompetent individuals (see Acute and Subacute Meningitis and also
Chronic Meningitis).
References
Antinori A, Ammassari A, De Luca A, et al. Diagnosis of AIDS-related
focal brain lesions: a decision-making analysis based on clinical
and neuroradiologic characteristics combined with polymerase chain
reaction assays in CSF. Neurology 1997;48(3):687–694.
Bicanic T, Harrison TS. Cryptococcal meningitis. Br Med Bull
2005;72:99–118.
Griffiths P. Cytomegalovirus infection of the central nervous system.
Herpes 2004;11(Suppl 2):95A–104A
Koralnik IJ. Neurologic diseases caused by human immunodeficiency
virus-1 and opportunistic infections. In Mandell GL, Bennett JE,
Dolin R, eds. Principles and Practices of Infectious Diseases, 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier, Churchill, Livingstone, 2005:1583–1601.
Lynn WA, Lightman S. Syphilis and HIV: a dangerous combination.
Lancet Infect Dis 2004;4(7):456–466.
Mamidi A, DeSimone JA, Pomerantz RJ. Central nervous system
infections in individuals with HIV-1 infection. J Neurovirol
2002;8(3):158–167.
Marra CM, Maxwell CL, Smith SL, et al. Cerebrospinal fluid abnormalities
in patients with syphilis: association with clinical and laboratory
features. J Infect Dis 2004;189(3):369–376.

329
HIV-Positive Patient with Suspected CNS INFECTION
(Cont’d from p 327)

E Serologic or

CSF evidence
of syphilis

F Positive

cryptococcal
antigen

G Bacterial
abscess

H Cysticercosis

I Consider:

Bacterial meningitis
HIV
CMV
TB
Other mycobacteria
etc.

