CERVICITIS
A. Although acute cervicitis can result from trauma, malignancy, or systemic collagen vascular conditions, it is
most commonly caused by infectious agents, notably
Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Chlamydia trachomatis, and to
a lesser extent herpes simplex virus (HSV). The epidemiology of these pathogens is similar, and 25%–45% of
patients have concomitant infections. Assessing a patient’s risk for cervical infection involves taking a careful history, including age at first sexual contact, number
of sex partners, and history of previous sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) or pelvic inflammatory disease
(PID). It is important to distinguish infections of the
lower genital tract limited to the cervix (cervicitis)
from those occurring in the vagina (vaginitis) or vulva
(vulvitis) and from upper genital tract disease, such as
PID. When cervicitis is associated with signs or symptoms of systemic disease, including fever, lower abdominal pain, or pelvic pain, consider PID as an additional diagnosis. Cervicitis generally is associated with
mucopurulent discharge collected from the cervix and
posterior vaginal fornix. Because the vaginal discharge
associated with vaginitis often appears similar, it is prudent to evaluate the discharge for the common vaginal
pathogens (candidal vaginitis, bacterial vaginosis, and
Trichomonas vaginalis). For patients with a confirmed
diagnosis of cervicitis who are at risk for STDs, offer
screening for other STDs, including syphilis, HIV, and
human papillomavirus (HPV), and Pap smear with reflexive HPV testing, if not screened in the past year.
B. Too often, lower abdominal pain in sexually active
women prompts the diagnosis of PID without application of criteria to substantiate the diagnosis. Hager’s
criteria for diagnosing acute salpingitis are listed in
Table 1. The severity of the illness determines whether
outpatient care or hospitalization is appropriate. Inpatient parenteral regimens combine a broad-spectrum

Table 1 Criteria for Diagnosing Acute Salpingitis
History of lower abdominal pain or tenderness, cervical motion tenderness, and adnexal tenderness
Plus one of the following objective findings:
Fever (body temperature !38" C)
Leukocytosis (WBC count !10,500/mm3)
Culdocentesis fluid containing WBCs or bacteria
Inflammatory mass on pelvic examination or sonography
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate !20 mm/hr
Evidence of gonococcus or Chlamydia on cervical Gram stain

578

cephalosporin (cefoxitin or cefotetan) with tetracycline (doxycycline) or clindamycin with an aminoglycoside. The preferred outpatient regimen combines
ceftriaxone with tetracycline (doxycycline), but quinolones (ofloxacin) can be combined with either metronidazole (Flagyl) or clindamycin. If pregnancy is possible, avoid tetracyclines and quinolones.
C. Cervical ulcerations often are accompanied by inguinal
or vulvar adenopathy. Pain distinguishes HSV from
syphilitic lesions in primary outbreaks. Primary genital
HSV often involves the vulva, urethra, and cervix, progressing from multiple painful vesicles to ulcers in the
presence of a systemic viremia. Recurrent HSV occurs
in the presence of circulating antibodies and is associated with an infection of muted duration and intensity.
Acyclovir is the mainstay of treatment and is particularly effective in primary infections in which early intervention significantly reduces viral shedding, accelerates
healing, and hastens recovery. Because acyclovir therapy has been changed to less frequent dosing (400 mg
three times a day) with proven efficacy, compliance is
favored. Valacyclovir and famciclovir, two newer acyclic
nucleoside derivatives, also may be considered for primary treatment of genital HSV. Syphilis, by contrast,
usually manifests on the cervix in a primary infection;
however, because it usually is asymptomatic, it is rarely
diagnosed at this stage. Identification of the stage of
infection plays a major role in determining the duration
of treatment. Penicillin is the drug of choice, with
almost no reported resistant strains.
D. When a growth is noted on the cervix in association
with cervicitis and discharge, obtain a cervical biopsy
specimen from the leading edge of the lesion to exclude
endophytic cervical neoplasia. More commonly, a whitish exophytic lesion is associated with genital warts or
HPV. These lesions by themselves usually represent an
infectious process involving HPV serotypes 6 and 11.
The HPV serotypes (16, 18, 31, 33, and 35) are recognized for their contribution to the neoplastic transformation that can promote cervical cancer. Application of
3% acetic acid to the cervix, along with colposcopically
directed biopsies, enables distinction between infectious and neoplastic lesions. This distinction influences
the choice of treatment. In rare instances tuberculous
cervicitis manifests as a mucopurulent discharge or
fungating mass. Diagnosis is made by cervical biopsy
demonstrating caseating granulomas or acid-fast bacilli
stain or culture.
(Continued on page 580)

579
Patient with CERVICITIS

A History:

Sexual history
STD history
History of cervical
cytologic surveillance
Physical examination:
Systemic and pelvic
signs and symptoms
of infection
Vaginal mucopurulent
discharge
Exclude:
Vaginitis

B Associated systemic
findings:
Fever
Abdominopelvic
pain

Obtain Appropriate
Cervical Cultures
and Treat
Empirically for
PID

Cervical lesion

C Ulcer

No cervical
lesion

D Growth or

Cont’d on p 581

mass

Pain present

No pain

Biopsy

HSV infection

Syphilis

Acyclovir
or
Famciclovir
or
Valacyclovir

Penicillin

Consider:
Cervical
neoplasia
HPV
Tuberculous
cervicitis

Consider:
Topical medications
Cryotherapy
Laser therapy
Surgical excision
Loop electrical
excision procedure

580
E. Gonococcal endocervicitis manifests symptoms, including mucopurulent vaginal discharge, uterine bleeding,
and dysuria, in 40%–60% of infections. The gold standard for the diagnosis is an endocervical culture plated
on modified Thayer-Martin medium. More practical are
newer rapid-assay techniques, such as Gonozyme.
Also, DNA probes are now available that have similar
accuracy to culture but have the convenience of not
needing to be processed immediately, as do the cultures.
Although procaine penicillin G, ampicillin, and amoxicillin continue to be effective, ceftriaxone 250 mg intramuscularly is preferred. The single treatment ensures
compliance while simultaneously covering penicillinaseproducing and chromosomally mediated resistant N.
gonorrhoeae. Alternative treatments include fluoroquinolones (a single intramuscular dose of ciprofloxacin
500 mg, ofloxacin 400 mg, or levofloxacin 250 mg),
although it must be noted that there is a rising incidence
of quinolone-resistant strains. Although Chlamydia is
the most prevalent sexually transmitted organism in the
United States, acute cervical infection often is asymptomatic. Chlamydia is readily diagnosed by nucleic acid
amplification. Direct culture, fluorescent monoclonal
antibody staining, or enzyme-linked immunoassay

(ELISA) is an alternative method of diagnosis. Both
of these methods are comparable to culture in their
specificity and sensitivity and are less expensive.
Azithromycin 1 g as a single, observed dose is the preferred therapeutic regimen. Doxycycline 100 mg twice
daily for 7 days is an alternative choice, although it is
less preferred as a result of the problems with compliance and should be avoided in pregnancy. When both
N. gonorrhoeae and Chlamydia are present, azithromycin 2 g as a single dose can be used alone. Because both
N. gonorrhoeae and Chlamydia are reportable STDs,
encourage patients to facilitate the evaluation and treatment of their sex partners. In some cases it may be helpful to obtain a test of cure to verify both patient compliance and microbial sensitivity.

References
ACOG Technical Bulletin. Gonorrhea and chlamydial infections. No. 19a.
March 1994.
Drugs for sexually transmitted diseases. Med Lett Drugs Ther
1995;37:117.
Sweet RL, Gibbs RS. Infectious Diseases of the Female Genital Tract,
ed 4. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2002.

581
Patient with CERVICITIS
(Cont’d from p 579)

E No cervical
lesion

Obtain cultures:
Gonococcus
Chlamydia
Mycoplasma

Treat Positive
Cultures with
Appropriate Antibiotic
Regimen
Repeat cultures
to document
test of cure
Positive culture
Assess patient
compliance in taking
treatment and in
having sexual partner
treated

Alternative Antibiotic
Regimen
Test of cure

