The evaluation of chest pain in women is an important step in the diagnosis of coronary artery disease (CAD). The diagnosis of CAD in women is problematic because most of the diagnostic pathways and outcomes are based on research in men. Epidemiologic studies show that CAD is a significant cause of morbidity and mortality in women and that women have a worse prognosis than men with myocardial infarction. Improved diagnosis of CAD in early stages is critical to prevent complications in women. This chapter's algorithm includes not only the pretest likelihood of disease but also guidelines for choosing the best tests for women.

A. There are clear gender differences in presenting symptoms of chest pain and in risk factor stratification. Women may have more atypical sites of pain, such as neck, shoulder, and intrascapular pain, and may have more associated symptoms of exertional dyspnea or decreased exercise tolerance. It is thus important to ask not only the usual historical questions to try to determine whether the patient has angina but also to ask about atypical characteristics. Risk factor assessment can be divided into major, intermediate, and minor determinants (Table 1). These, along with the character of the pain, can be used to place women in categories of likelihood of CAD. This stratification makes testing for CAD more cost effective and informative. Risk factor assessment is more likely to predict CAD in women (54.5% of cases, compared with 39.3% of cases in men). Stronger predictive value exists, particularly in younger women with risk factors.

B. Evaluate a baseline electrocardiogram (ECG) before conducting other tests in women. Because exercise tolerance testing (ETT) in women may be flawed by false-positive results, having a normal resting ECG improves the diagnostic yield of testing. If the resting ECG is abnormal, with left ventricular hypertrophy, bundle branch block, or an early J point elevation, it may increase the likelihood of a false-positive result, and therefore an imaging ETT may be the most cost-effective test in this group. The use of stress echocardiography as an initial test in all women with chest pain has been proposed as a cost-effective approach, achieving a diagnostic accuracy similar to that of stress thallium ETT. Stress echocardiography is less costly than stress thallium ETT but is technically demanding for the average echo laboratory and thus may not be widely available.

C. High likelihood of disease or definite angina is predicted by two or more major determinants or by one major plus more than one intermediate or minor determinant. This group of women has a pretest likelihood of CAD of 80%. In this group, ETT without imaging is the initial test of choice (unless the patient has clinical characteristics other than being female that necessitate imaging). Studies show that 60%-75% of women in this group had significant CAD at angiography, and 29%-53% had multivessel disease. The specificity of ETT in this setting is 57%, with a sensitivity of 80%. Women with single-vessel disease may be missed by ETT; only 43% of them will have abnormal findings. When following women with characteristics suggestive of angina, remember that single-vessel disease is more common in women than in men. Nonetheless, despite its limitations, a maximal negative ETT should not be overlooked, because it largely rules out exercise-induced ischemia associated with multivessel disease. If symptoms persist despite a negative maximal ETT, raising concern of single-vessel disease, stress echocardiography or pharmacologic stress echocardiography may be appropriate. This technique has a sensitivity and specificity of 80%-90% for single-vessel disease in women.

D. The most cost-effective approach in women with typical angina and a normal baseline ECG is ETT. Women in this group are unlikely to have false-positive results, and the likelihood of false-negative results is much less than in their male counterparts if they achieve maximal heart rate. Imaging ETT increases the cost of this test and adds little clinically useful information.

E. If the ETT is negative, the patient can be followed closely. A decision about management may be difficult for the woman with a positive test result. The literature holds convincing evidence of the gender differences in further testing after a positive ETT result. It is unclear whether this gender difference represents patient preference (women perceive their risk of heart disease as low); physician perception of the “benign” nature of CAD in women, based on the Framingham and CASS studies; or overtreatment of men. A woman should be referred for coronary angiography for the same reasons as her male counterpart (i.e., unstable angina or markedly positive ETT at low workload). Some advocate angiography for women with a positive ETT at high workload. Some studies show a higher incidence of cardiac events in women regardless of initial ETT response: 14.3% of women with an abnormal ETT result will have a cardiac event, versus 6% of men with a positive ETT. Because most of the coronary events occurred in patients who did not undergo revascularization procedures, one can make an excellent case for complete evaluation and treatment, including catheterization, for all women with positive tests. This strategy may actually be of greater benefit to women than similar care is to men.

F. Moderate likelihood of disease is predicted by one major or by multiple indeterminate and minor determinants. This group has the widest pretest probability of CAD, ranging from 20%-80%. Most women in actual practice are in this category. The prevalence of CAD in this group is about 30%-40%, with 4%-22% having multivessel disease. These women clearly need further examination, but the best test to use is unclear. The sensitivity and specificity of routine ETT in this group are about 65%. Therefore, a test result has a reasonable chance of being either a false positive or a false negative. Because this may not add to the diagnostic certainty, it may be more prudent to proceed with either a thallium/sestamibi ETT or stress echocardiography. Although the sensitivity of these tests does not add significantly to the ETT, the addition of imaging improves specificity in women to 80%-90%. In particular, stress echocardiography may dramatically improve the sensitivity and specificity for single-vessel disease.

G. Women with nonischemic pain are in the lowest risk group, with >20% likelihood of CAD. This group is defined as those with no major determinants, no or one intermediate determinant, and two or fewer minor determinants. On further analysis, the nonischemic pain group will have a 2%-7% incidence of CAD and virtually no multivessel disease. Because of the low prevalence of significant disease in this group, any test that might show an abnormality is of little value, or more likely a false positive. Look for noncardiac causes of pain (e.g., cholecystitis, gastroesophageal reflux, chest wall pain, pulmonary etiologies, or anxiety) in this group before proceeding with evaluation.

H. If the patient continues to have symptoms that limit her lifestyle, further evaluation with imaging, ETT, or even angiography may be needed to refute or confirm the existence of CAD, particularly in postmenopausal women.