CHOOSING APPROPRIATE ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY

The choice of appropriate antimicrobial therapy should
be based on several factors, including pathogens being
treated, the antimicrobial spectrum, and a variety of
patient-specific factors. Antibiotic choices should be
based on a sound rationale.
A. Empiric therapy is based on a presumptive diagnosis
of infection or clinical syndrome. Especially in the
hospital setting, empiric therapy is broad in spectrum, designed to cover the most likely pathogens in
the specific patient. Before initiating empiric therapy, obtain appropriate specimens for culture and
sensitivity. Empiric therapy is indicated when the
infection is potentially rapidly life-threatening (sepsis, pneumonia) or causes significant morbidity (urinary tract infection, severe dysentery). Therapy
should be based on available evidence-based guidelines rather than drug manufacturer marketing and
advertising.
B. The most likely pathogens at a site of infection may be
based on normal flora at that site; tropism of certain
pathogens for various tissues or organs; and patientspecific factors such as previous antimicrobial therapy,
nosocomial versus community-acquired infection, and
patient immune status. Not every possible pathogen
requires coverage—just those that are most likely. Emergence of drug resistance in common bacterial pathogens
such as Streptococcus pneumoniae, Staphylococcus aureus, and Enterococcus and spread of these organisms to
the community has made antibiotic decision making
more complex. The clinician must know current local
resistance patterns of common pathogens and factors
driving increased resistance. The use of certain drugs,
such as vancomycin and linezolid, should be based on
strict guidelines to reduce the development and spread
of resistance.
C. Patient-specific factors include history of previous
adverse reactions to antimicrobials, patient age, pregnancy or lactation, concomitant drugs, excretory organ
function, immune status, and site of infection. For
patients who are very ill, IV administration is preferable to ensure adequate drug concentrations at the
site of infection.

702

D. Combination therapy is indicated when broad-spectrum
coverage is desired (sepsis), in polymicrobial infections
(intraperitoneal abscesses), to prevent the emergence of
resistance (tuberculosis), or to provide antimicrobial synergy (streptococcal endocarditis, !-lactam/aminoglycoside
for Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections, amphotericin/
5-flucytosine for cryptococcal meningitis).
E. The cost of drug therapy is based not only on the drug
cost but on the cost of administration, supplies, and
monitoring. If all else is equal, choose the least expensive regimen. However, therapeutic efficacy is of primary importance.
F. Definitive therapy occurs when a microbiologic and a
clinical diagnosis are confirmed. Definitive therapy is
narrow in spectrum and generally requires only one
drug. If the patient was previously receiving empiric
therapy, determine the need for continued treatment.
G. Susceptibility data are useful in determining definitive
therapy, but there are pitfalls. If the reported susceptibilities do not fit usual patterns for that organism, the
reliability of the information is suspect. If minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs) are present, in general,
any drug in the sensitive MIC range will be effective.
Some forms of antibiotic resistance may not be
detected by standard laboratory methodology.
H. Even with positive cultures, broad-spectrum therapy
may be indicated, especially in patients who are immunosuppressed. Base the choice of antimicrobial
regimen on clinical judgment and laboratory data.
I. A variety of drug-specific factors must be considered.
Certain agents do not penetrate well into certain
tissues (e.g., aminoglycosides in CNS infections, vancomycin in pulmonary infections). If a relatively new
antimicrobial is considered, there should be clinical
trials documenting efficacy compared with the conventional regimen for that infection. Consider drug toxicity; reserve more toxic drugs (aminoglycosides, amphotericin B) for patients at higher risk.
J. If the patient is not critically ill and has adequate GI
tract function, give oral antimicrobials as soon as possible. However, in some cases, long-term or home IV
antimicrobial therapy is indicated if oral agents are
not available for the specific infection.

703
Patient for ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY

A Empiric therapy

F Definitive therapy

Evidence of infection

No evidence of infection

Presumed sites of infection

Antimicrobial therapy
not indicated

Culture and sensitivity data
Assess response to
previous therapy

Obtain body fluids
for staining, culture

B Empiric therapy needed
Determine most likely
pathogens at site(s) of
infection; current and future
local microbial resistance factors

Continued therapy
needed

Empiric therapy
not needed

G Evaluate sensitivity data

Await culture results

Organism sensitive
Sensitivity reliable

Need to cover
other organisms

factors
Choose route of administration

H

D Assess need for

combination therapy

Continue
Broad-Spectrum
Therapy

Determine agents most
likely to be effective

Drugs not
on formulary

Choose regimen and dose
Use formulary
agents if possible

Develop monitoring plan
for efficacy and toxicity
Evaluate response in 48 – 72 hr

Negative response

Assess cultures

Negative response

Positive

Negative

Reconsider diagnosis

Definitive
Therapy

Continue
Empiric
Therapy

Repeat cultures

Continue to monitor for efficacy, toxicity

Consider:
Narrow-spectrum
agents

Choose agent and
appropriate dose

Evaluate response in 48 – 72 hr

Positive response

Do not use for
definitive therapy

Agent’s ability to reach
infection site
Clinical trials demonstrating
efficacy for organism
and disease
Toxicity relative to severity
of infection
Cost-effectiveness

of potential choices

Develop monitoring plan
for efficacy and toxicity

No need to
cover other
organisms

I Assess:

E Assess cost-effectiveness

Drugs on formulary

Discontinue
antibiotics

Organism
resistant or
intermediate

Definitive Therapy

C Evaluate patient-specific

Continued
therapy
not needed

Consider:
Nonbacterial or
resistant pathogen
Drug fever

References
Avorn J, Solomon DH. Cultural and economic factors that (mis)shape
antibiotic use: the nonpharmacologic basis of therapeutics. Ann Intern
Med 2000;133:128–135.
Burgess DS, Abate BJ. Antimicrobial regimen selection. In DiPiro JT,
Talbert RL, Yee CG, et al, eds. Pharmacotherapy: A Pathophysiologic
Approach, 6th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005:1909–1919.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Antibiotic/antimicrobial
resistance. Available at www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/publications.htm.
Accessed March 23, 2006.

Positive response
Use Oral Agent
as Soon as Possible
Discontinue therapy
when infection is cured
Monitor for relapse

Choice of antibacterial drugs. Treat Guidel Med Lett 2004;2:13–26.
Infectious Diseases Society of America Standards. Practice guidelines
and statements. Available at www.idsociety.org/Content/NavigationMenu/Practice_Guidelines/Standards_Practice_Guidelines_
Statements/Standards,_Practice_Guidelines,_and_Statements.htm.
Accessed August 23, 2006.

