CHOOSING A CHRONIC DIALYSIS MODALITY


Patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) should be informed of the possibility of progression of disease early in
the course of their kidney disease. Specific preparation and
education about dialysis and transplantation modalities,
however, is usually reserved until the patient has reached
stage 4 kidney disease (i.e., a glomerular filtration rate
[GFR] of 15–29 ml/min).
A. When the patient reaches stage 4 CKD, he or she
should be presented with the range of renal replacement options: preemptive transplantation if feasible;
hemodialysis (HD), both in-center and home; and
peritoneal dialysis (PD). The education of the patient
regarding these options may occur in any of a number
of settings. The physician may provide education in the
course of a routine clinic visit. Alternatively, the physician may refer the patient to a dialysis nurse educator
who may spend time with the patient and family members discussing renal replacement options either in an
individual session or as a part of a dialysis “options”
class. PD is underused in the United States relative to
HD. However, when patients are educated about both
HD and PD and given a choice as to which modality to
use, the percentage of patients choosing PD increases.
Although studies comparing HD versus PD in terms
of hard outcomes such as mortality continue to generate controversy, there is consensus that patients who
choose PD tend to be more satisfied with their treatment and have a higher self-reported quality of life.
B. Because renal transplantation is the best option for
long-term renal replacement, patients with stage
4 CKD should be evaluated for their suitability for
renal transplantation (see Selection of Patients for
Transplantation). The major source of morbidity and
mortality in recipients of renal transplants is cardiovascular disease; therefore, particular attention should be
paid to screening and/or prevention of cardiovascular
disease. If there are no medical contraindications
to renal transplantation and there is a suitable living
donor, the patient may be a candidate for preemptive
renal transplantation.
C. The patient with CKD being considered for PD should
be evaluated for medical suitability for this dialysis
modality. The key issues include the following:
(1) Abdominal surgery: The major technical consideration that may affect the decision to choose this
modality is a history of major abdominal surgery.
The presence of intraabdominal adhesions may
adversely affect solute and fluid transport across
394

the peritoneal membrane, making PD technically
difficult. However, newer laparoscopic surgical
techniques for placement of PD catheters allow
for visualization of the peritoneal space and simultaneous lysis of adhesions when they are identified.
(2) Body habitus: Obesity is not itself a contraindication to PD; however, it does merit special consideration. The patient who is morbidly obese may
require placement of a presternal peritoneal catheter (a catheter that has an extension allowing it to
exit at the sternum) to reduce the risk of exit site
infection. The patient who is obese should also be
counseled about the risk of weight gain, development of or progression to more difficult to control
diabetes mellitus, and hyperlipidemia associated
with PD.
(3) Diabetes mellitus: Glycemic control often becomes
more difficult when a patient with diabetes starts
receiving PD. Control of blood sugars usually requires a more intense insulin regimen using subcutaneous and/or intraperitoneal insulin and may
require comanagement with the primary care provider or diabetologist. Poor glycemic control in the
patient with diabetes is also a risk factor for impaired ultrafiltration because of the diminished
osmotic gradient between the blood compartment
and the peritoneal compartment.
Because PD is a home-based, self-directed form of
renal replacement, the patient who chooses this form
of therapy must be able to learn the technique. Formal education is not a requisite; patients who are illiterate have been successfully taught to perform PD.
However, patients with cognitive impairment may not
be able to master the technique. These patients may
still be managed at home on PD if there is adequate
social support at home, such as a spouse or family
member who is trained to assist the patient in performing dialysis.
D. The evaluation of the patient with CKD for HD should
include examination of the extremities for venous access sites. The arteriovenous (AV) fistula is the preferred dialysis access, and it may require 3–6 months
for maturation. The nondominant arm is typically used
for the first dialysis access. In elderly patients, diabetic
patients with small vessel disease, and patients who
have no accessible veins, an AV graft may be necessary.
If neither an AV fistula or graft is feasible, a tunneled

395
Patient for Selection of CHRONIC DIALYSIS MODALITY
Educate—renal replacement options

B Transplant candidate

Living donor

Not a transplant
candidate

No living donor

Preemptive
transplant

Dialysis education

C Patient chooses PD

Medical contraindication

E Refer for

E Refer for

PD catheter

catheter inserted into a central vein (internal jugular or
subclavian vein) may be the only recourse. An AV fistula is preferred because of the substantially lower
complication rate compared to either an AV graft or a
tunneled catheter. These complications include thrombosis, infection, and mechanical failure. The patient
should be instructed to avoid venipuncture and blood
pressure measurements in that arm to preserve veins
for access creation. The cardiovascular system should
also be assessed for signs of heart failure. The patient
who is volume overloaded and who also has significantly impaired left ventricular function may have difficulty in reaching his or her dry weight because of
HD-associated hypotension.
Patients undergoing HD have several options regarding the setting of the treatments. The most common scenario is a patient undergoing treatment
in a freestanding outpatient dialysis unit. However, a
hospital-based unit or HD at home are other potential
possibilities.
E. When the patient with CKD has been educated on
renal replacement options and has reached a deci-

D Patient chooses HD
AV fistula

sion on a preferred modality, the patient should be
referred to a surgeon with expertise in either vascular access for HD or PD catheter placement. The
native AV fistula will require 3–6 months for maturation; thus, the patient should be referred at a minimum of 6 months before the anticipated need to
start HD. A PD catheter usually requires 2–3 weeks
to heal. The patient who chooses PD should be seen
preoperatively by the surgeon at least 2 months prior
to initiation of dialysis.
References
Mange KC, Marshall MJ, Feldman HI. Effect of the use or nonuse of
long-term dialysis on the subsequent survival of renal transplants from
living donors. N Engl J Med 2001;344:726–731.
Manns BJ, Taub K, Vanderstraeten C, et al. The impact of education on
chronic kidney disease patients’ plans to initiate dialysis with self-care
dialysis: a randomized trial. Kidney Int 2005;68:1777–1783.
Mehrotra R, Marsh D, Vonesh E, et al. Patient education and access
of ESRD patients to renal replacement therapies beyond in-center
hemodialysis. Kidney Int 2005;68:378–390.
Rubin H, Fink N, Plantinga L, et al. Patient ratings of dialysis care with
peritoneal dialysis vs hemodialysis. JAMA 2004;291:697–703.

