CHRONIC ABDOMINAL PAIN

Chronic abdominal pain is a common and challenging
symptom that is commonly evaluated by primary care
providers, gastroenterologists, and surgeons. The vast majority of these patients have a functional disorder. Chronic
intractable or undiagnosed abdominal pain is defined
by the presence of abdominal pain for at least 6 months
without a specific diagnosis after an adequate evaluation. Differentiating functional GI disorders from organic
pathology is essential for clinical management. In the
United States, it is estimated that the prevalence of chronic
functional abdominal pain is 2%, and it occurs primarily
in women.
A. A careful, detailed history and physical examination
are mandatory to direct further evaluation. Determining
the pattern of pain, type of pain, and overall time course
of the illness often leads to a systematic and reasonable
evaluation. Also, specific details about the pain, such as
location, characteristics, alleviating or aggravating factors, and chronology of events, often help to narrow a
broad differential diagnosis. Associated symptoms, such
as fever, chills, nausea, vomiting, jaundice, weight gain
or loss, diarrhea, constipation, melena, hematochezia,
change in the color of urine or stool, or change in the
diameter of stool should be included in the history. In
women, a menstrual history should be obtained.
B. Biliary tract disease leads to intermittent acute pain that
is usually localized to the right upper quadrant or the
epigastric area that lasts for 15 minutes or a few hours.
The pain may radiate to the back or scapula and is often
associated with restlessness, sweating, or vomiting. Episodes are typically separated by weeks to months. A
history of recurrent pancreatitis or excessive alcohol intake should raise the possibility of chronic pancreatitis.
Upper GI symptoms can be related to ulcer or nonulcer
dyspepsia. Postprandial abdominal pain may be related
to underlying chronic intestinal ischemia, gastroparesis,

168

intermittent intestinal obstruction, pancreatitis, or peptic
ulcer disease. Features that suggest organic illness include unstable weight loss, fever, dehydration, electrolyte abnormalities, symptoms or signs of GI blood loss,
anemia, and signs of malnutrition and abnormal physical
findings.
Routine laboratory testing is mandatory to evaluate
for any underlying disease process. CBC, basal metabolic panel (BMP), liver function tests, amylase, and
urinalysis (including porphobilinogen in cases of suspected acute intermittent porphyria) are needed. Stool
analysis for leucocytes, ova, and parasites should be
obtained as clinically indicated. Diagnostic imaging
studies such as abdominal x-ray films, abdominal ultrasonography, CT scan of the abdomen, upper GI series
with small bowel follow-through, or MRI may be indicated. Endoscopic studies, including upper, lower, capsule endoscopy and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), are also performed according
to each clinical setting.
C. Chronic pain originating from the abdominal wall may
be confused with visceral pain, often leading to extensive
evaluation. Chronic abdominal wall pain may be related
to nerve entrapment, radicular pain radiating from T 7 to
T12 lesions, or referred pain from abdominal or thoracic
lesions. Radicular pain across the abdomen may also be
worse with movement and may be caused by irritation of
the spinal nerve root from disc and vertebral body
disease, a meningeal tumor, tabes dorsalis secondary to
syphilis or diabetes, or postherpetic neuralgia. Treatment
with a local anesthetic agent is effective for most patients
with chronic abdominal wall and radicular pain, which
can further confirm the diagnosis.
D. Pelvic pain can be from either GI or gynecologic
causes. Common gynecologic sources of pelvic pain
include ovarian and uterine tumors, chronic pelvic
inflammatory disease, and endometriosis.
(Continued on page 170)

169
Patient with CHRONIC ABDOMINAL PAIN

A History

Laboratory tests

Physical examination

C Abdominal
wall
source

Referred
spinal
nerve
source

D Pelvic source

Vascular
aneurysm
Ultrasonography
CT
Angiography

Ultrasonography
Laparoscopy

Nonlocalized or
inapparent source

Cont’d on p 171

B Evidence suggestive

of visceral organ source

Stomach

Small bowel

Pancreas

Hepatobiliary

Renal

Colon

Consider:
Peptic ulcer
Gastric
tumor

Consider:
Inflammation
Tumor
Obstruction

Consider:
Pancreatitis
Cyst/tumor

Consider:
Pyelonephritis
Nephrolithiasis
Tumor/cyst

Consider:
Inflammation
Tumor
Obstruction
Diverticulosis

Endoscopy
Upper GI Series

Small Bowel
Follow-Through
or Enteroclysis
CT

Consider:
Gallstones
Biliary
obstruction
Tumor/cyst
Infiltration
Chronic
hepatitis
Engorgement
Ultrasonography
CT
ERCP
Liver Biopsy

Ultrasonography
CT
ERCP
Pancreatic Function Test

Ultrasonography
CT
IV Pyelography

Barium
Enema
and/or
Endoscopy

170
E. Metabolic disorders may rarely be associated with abdominal pain. These include acute intermittent porphyria, adrenal insufficiency, hypercalcemia, or hyperthyroidism, and hypothyroidism. Other rare causes
include familial Mediterranean fever, hereditary angioedema, diabetic neuropathy, and carcinoid syndrome.
F. Features suggesting irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)
are pain for at least 12 weeks (not necessarily consecutive) associated with bowel habit changes, no alarming
features, and the absence of nocturnal symptoms. Pain
relief with defecation, mucus in the stool, and sensation of incomplete evacuation are typical. Abdominal
pain in IBS is usually a crampy sensation of variable
intensity and periodic exacerbations. Functional abdominal pain syndrome (FAPS) follows specific diagnostic characteristics. The Rome II criteria for functional abdominal pain include at least 6 months of the
following symptoms:
• Continuous or nearly continuous abdominal pain
• None or occasional relationship of pain with physiologic events
• Some loss of daily functioning
• Real pain (i.e., the pain is not feigned)
• Insufficient criteria for other functional gastrointestinal disorders that would explain abdominal pain
G. Chronic mesenteric ischemia, also known as intestinal
angina, is manifested by recurrent abdominal pain,
which usually develops in patients with mesenteric
atherosclerotic disease. Patients complain of dull,

crampy postprandial epigastric pain within the first
hour after eating. The pain subsides in the next couple
of hours. Weight loss is seen in about 80% of the
patients.
The goals of treatment in patients with chronic
abdominal pain are to identify and manage the
underlying cause. It is most important to delineate
functional abdominal pain from serious disease
processes. Management of patients with functional
diseases often requires a multidisciplinary approach.

References
Drossman DA. Functional abdominal pain syndrome. Clin Gastroenterol
Hepatol 2004;2(5):353–365.
Drossman, DA, Zhiming, L, Andruzzi, E, et al. US householders survey
of functional gastrointestinal disorders: prevalence, sociodemography,
and health impact. Dig Dis Sci 1993;38:1569.
Feldman M, Friedman LS, Sleisenger MH. Gastrointestinal and Liver
Disease Pathophysiology, Diagnosis and Management. 7th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2002.
Friedman HH. Problem-Oriented Medical Diagnosis. 6th ed. Boston:
Little, Brown and Company, 1998.
Friedman SL, McQuaid KR, Grendell JH. Current Diagnosis and Treatment
in Gastroenterology. 2nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2003.
Hungin AP, Chang L, Locke GR, et al. Irritable bowel syndrome in the
United States: prevalence, symptom patterns and impact. Aliment
Pharmacol Ther 2005; 21(11):1365–1375.
Williams RE, Black CL, Kim HY, et al. Stability of irritable bowel syndrome using a Rome II-based classification. Aliment Pharmacol Ther
2006; 23(1):197–205.

171
Nonlocalized or
inapparent source
(Cont’d from p 169)

Consider:
E Consider:
Metabolic
Tumor/cyst
disorders
Infection
Inflammatory
process:
Peritoneum
Mesentery
Omentum
Retroperitoneum
Ultrasonography
CT
Laparoscopy
Laparotomy

Consider:
Drug effect
Lead toxicity

F Functional

pain/dysmotility

IBS
Nonulcer
dyspepsia
Postcholecystectomy
syndrome

G Chronic

mesenteric
ischemia
Vasculitis
Angiography

