CHRONIC MENINGITIS

A. Chronic meningitis is defined by symptoms and/or
signs suggestive of meningeal irritation that have
been present for at least 4 weeks. Symptoms usually
begin insidiously. Patients typically present with
headache, neck stiffness, and mental status changes
with or without fever. The differential diagnosis is
broad (Table 1) and includes infections, malignancies,
inflammatory disorders, and iatrogenesis. The evaluation of chronic meningitis begins with careful history
about pattern of headache to exclude recurrent meningitis (classically caused by herpes simplex virus
[HSV]) or migraines.
B. Head imaging is essential to evaluate for structural
lesions that can cause chronic head pain and meningeal irritation, such as brain abscesses, tumors, hydrocephalus, and cerebral aneurysms with intermittent
hemorrhage. The superior detail and resolution achievable with MRI compared with CT can yield additional

clues to diagnosis. Lymphoma, toxoplasmosis, cysticercosis, sarcoidosis, and other lesions can have characteristic appearances on high-resolution imaging.
C. The pattern of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pleocytosis
and chemistry can also guide diagnosis, so a lumbar
puncture (LP) should be performed. An eosinophilic
pleocytosis is seen with cysticercosis after cyst rupture,
coccidiomycosis, Angiostrongylus, and schistosomiasis.
Neutrophilic pleocytosis is seen with brucellosis, Nocardia, actinomycosis, and meningitis with endemic
fungi. Lymphocytic pleocytosis is the most common
pattern and the least specific—it is seen in lymphomatous meningitis; sarcoidosis; connective tissue disorders; and infections such as neuroborreliosis, syphilis,
tuberculosis, and Cryptococcus. Low CSF glucose
is associated with carcinomatous, tuberculous, and
fungal meningitis. Very high CSF protein is usually
seen in carcinomatous meningitis.
(Continued on page 306)

Table 1
Etiologies of Chronic Meningitis
Infections

Malignancies
Inflammatory disorders
Medications
Irriants

304

Tuberculosis, brucelllosis, Nocardia, actinomycosis, syphilis, Lyme disease,
ehrilichiosis, listeriosis
Cryptococcus, histoplasmosis, coccidiomycosis, blastomycosis, sporotrichosis
Schistosmiasis trypanosomiasis, cysticercosis, toxoplasmosis, Angiostrongylus
HIV, human T-cell leukemia virus, enterovirus, cytomegallovirus, herpes simplex virus,, varicella
zoster virus, Epstein-bar virus
Lymphoma, leukemia, primary brain tumors, metastases of solid malignancies
(usually breast, lung, and meleanoma)
Sarcoidosis, Wegener’s granulomatosis, Behçet’s disease systemic lupus
erythmatosus, granulomatous angiitis
NSAIDs
Indwelling intrathecal devices, intrathecal chemotherapy

305
Patient with CHRONIC MENINGITIS
Headache ! fever ! meningismus

A "4 wk and

persistent?

Yes

B Head CT or MRI

C LP for CSF evaluation:

No
Consider causes of
subacute or recurrent
meningitis (e.g., enterovirus, HSV)

Mass lesion
Neutrophilic: brucellosis, Nocardia,
actinomycosis, endemic fungi
Neurosurgical evaluation
Eosinophilic: cysticercosis,
for biopsy, excision, or
coccidiomycosis, schistosomiasis, drainage of mass
angiostrongyliasis
Lymphocytic: lymphoma, sarcoid,
connective tissue disease,
Lyme disease, syphilis, tuberculosis
cryptococcus

Cont’d on p 307

306
D. Chronic meningitis is more common among patients who
are immunocompromised because of their increased susceptibility to infection. Patients with agammaglobulinemia
are susceptible to persistent or recurrent enterovirus meningitis. HIV testing should be routinely performed on all
patients with chronic meningitis. Patients with HIV, along
with patients who have received a transplant and people
receiving chemotherapy, should then be evaluated for tuberculosis, Cryptococcus neoformans, neurosyphilis, viral
meningitis (HSV, varicella-zoster virus [VZV], cytomegalovirus [CMV], Epstein-Barr virus [EBV]), and other fungal
diseases.
E. In patients who are immunocompetent, detailed
history and physical examination along with evaluation
of the nature of the CSF pleocytosis can guide the
differential diagnosis. Travel or residence in areas
endemic for tuberculosis (Africa, South America,
Caribbean, Asia, Eastern Europe) can be helpful. Likewise, time spent in the southwestern United States
or Mexico raises the possibility of coccidiomycosis,
residence in the Ohio and Mississippi river valleys or
Caribbean suggests evaluation for histoplasmosis, and
residence in the southeastern United States can be a
clue to blastomycosis. Exposures to farm animals or
unpasteurized dairy products suggest brucellosis or listeriosis. Tick bites, gardening, golf, or hiking in Lymeendemic areas warrant testing for neuroborreliosis.
On examination, cranial neuropathies are suggestive
of basilar meningitis associated with tuberculosis, neuroborreliosis, carcinomatous meningitis, or sarcoidosis.
Iritis, uveitis, oral and/or genital ulcerations, skin rash,
arthritis, and serositis are suggestive of inflammatory
disorders such as Behçet’s disease, Sjögren’s syndrome,
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), or sarcoidosis.
Blood tests for HIV, syphilis, Lyme disease, cryptococcal antigen, ANA, double-stranded DNA, liver
function tests, and blood cultures should supplement
the history and physical examination.
CT scanning of the chest can yield further clues to
sarcoidosis, Wegener’s granulomatosis, tuberculosis,

fungal disease, and malignancy. Abnormalities identified
outside the brain might be more amenable to biopsy
than the meninges or CNS.
F. Once a clinical suspicion has been generated on the
basis of history, examination, and preliminary CSF
evaluation, it is often necessary to repeat the LP to
obtain additional CSF for special studies. A large
volume of fluid is necessary to optimize the yield of
cytologic and microbiologic studies. At least 5 ml
should be sent for cytology and flow cytometry. A
minimum of 10 ml is recommended to assess for mycobacteria and fungi via stain and culture. Special CSF
studies for suspected infections can include cryptococcal antigen; VDRL; fungal serologies; and polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) for mycobacteria, Lyme disease,
brucellosis, and herpes family viruses (HSV, VZV,
CMV, EBV).
G. If extensive evaluation fails to yield a diagnosis and the
patient’s symptoms are deteriorating or severe, then
consider a brain or meningeal biopsy. These can be
particularly helpful in diagnosing elusive malignancy,
tuberculosis, and vasculitic disease. The yield of biopsy
is greatest if directed to meningeal or parenchymal
abnormalities seen on MRI.
H. Consideration should also be given to a trial of empiric
therapy. Empiric therapy is usually begun with antituberculous medications. These should be continued for at
least 2 weeks before assessing their impact. If antituberculous therapy is not helpful and ongoing investigations
fail to yield a diagnosis, then a trial of steroid therapy has
been reported to be helpful in up to 50% of cases.

References
Hildebrand J, Aoun M. Chronic meningitis: still a diagnostic challenge.
J Neurol 2003;250:653–660.
Sexton DJ. Approach to the patient with chronic meningitis. UpToDate
Online 13.3. Available at: www.uptodate.com. Accessed November
22, 2005.

307
Patient with CHRONIC MENINGITIS
(Cont’d from p 305)
Detailed history and
physical examination
Basic laboratory tests (HIV,
immunoglobulins)

D Immunocompromised:

E Immunocompetent:

Travel or residence
in endemic region?
Tuberculosis, histoplasmosis,
coccidiomycosis, blastomycosis
Farm animals or unpasteurized
products?
Brucellosis, listeriosis
Tick bites or outdoor activities?
Lyme disease
Cranial neuropathies?
Tuberculosis, Lyme disease,
sarcoid, carcinoma
Rash, arthritis, mucosal
ulceration, uveitis?
Behçet’s syndrome, Sjögren’s
syndrome, SLE, sarcoid,
Wegener’s disease

Enterovirus
Tuberculosis
Cryptococcus
Neurosyphilis
Endemic fungi
Herpes viruses (HSV,
VZV, CMV, EBV)

F Repeat LP

for large-volume CSF sample
for guided diagnostic studies
Unrevealing, patient ill

G Biopsy of brain or meninges
Unrevealing, patient ill

H Empiric antituberculous
therapy and/or steroids

