CHRONIC BEHAVIOR CHANGE


Chronic behavior change is a useful descriptor that
encompasses dementia, aphasia and other focal cognitive
disorders, chronic encephalopathy, and psychiatric disorders. Dementia is a clinical syndrome defined as sustained
or progressive decline in cognition or behavior that interferes with routine daily activities. Any domains of mental
function may be affected, including memory, language, visuospatial skills, attention, executive function, judgment,
and social or emotional behavior. The persistence of the
deficit(s) differentiates dementia from acute confusional
state or delirium (see the section on acute confusional
state). Although many types of dementia are progressive,
some (e.g., posttraumatic) are relatively static. Aphasia and
other focal cognitive disorders are often chronic but are
not considered dementias because they may not encompass multiple domains of cognition or behavior and may
not significantly interfere with routine activities outside
the specific impairment. They may result from residual
static damage following acute brain insults, such as stroke,
abscess, or tumor. Chronic encephalopathy is a loosely defined term that implies an ongoing medical etiology, such
as hepatic or renal encephalopathy. Chronic psychiatric
disorders, by definition, involve chronic behavior change
and are discussed elsewhere (see the section on behavioral
medicine). The list of possible causes of these varieties
of chronic behavior change is long, so it is useful to pursue an organized approach to evaluation, with the goal of
identifying the most specific diagnosis and treatment. It is
critical to remember that, although most forms of dementia or chronic behavior change are irreversible, they are
all treatable. Treatment may (rarely) reverse or partly reverse the overall level of impairment, may produce modest
improvements in specific aspects of cognition, may alleviate behavioral symptoms, or may improve safety. Comprehensive, multidisciplinary treatment programs for dementia include pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic therapy
for cognitive and behavioral symptoms, patient and family
support and education, the maximization of safety, and
referral to social services and community resources.
A. As is the case for acute behavior change, a detailed history is the essential first step in the evaluation of chronic
behavior change. The first office visit is often best devoted primarily to the gathering of information from the
patient and a knowledgeable informant (spouse, child,
friend). A structured approach to history taking is helpful, focusing first on specific symptoms and reviewing all
domains of cognition and behavior (memory, language,
visuospatial skills, attention, executive function, mood,
454

personality, social behavior) and general neurologic function (vision, motor behavior, gait). It is critical to determine the degree to which a patient’s routine activities
have been altered by these symptoms (slowing, increased
mistakes, the need for supervision, the relinquishment of
activities). A comprehensive review of systems can reveal
important relevant history regarding possible etiologies
or potential contributors (e.g., transient ischemic attacks,
symptoms suggestive of endocrine dysfunction, sleep
disturbance, or depression). A medical and family history
can be useful to identify additional clinical context and
risk profiles (e.g., cerebrovascular risk, family history of
Alzheimer’s disease [AD]). Social history is key to the
establishment of a premorbid baseline, against which
current symptoms should be compared. Highly educated
patients may perform surprisingly well on mental status
testing but have significant impairment in complex social
or vocational activities.
B. The evaluation should include medical and neurologic
examination and mental status examination. The presence of medical (e.g., cardiac arrhythmia or carotid
bruit) or neurologic (e.g., visual field loss, focal weakness, upgoing toe) signs may provide important etiologic clues. The mental status examination should include observations of the patient’s behavior during the
interview, particularly focused on arousal and attention,
affect, motivation, insight, comportment, and spontaneous use of language. Waxing and waning attention,
depressed affect, apathy, denial of deficits or anosognosia, disinhibition or lack of concern, dysarthria, wordfinding pauses, or circumlocutory or emptiness of
speech may be important signs helpful in the characterization and localization of cerebral dysfunction. A detailed yet focused cognitive examination can yield additional useful information and may yield surprising
deficits in patients with relatively preserved social skills.
If the mental status examination provides information
consistent with the history, the clinician may be satisfied with the characterization of symptoms and signs
and wish to pursue an etiologic workup. If questions
remain regarding the presence, absence, or nature of
cognitive dysfunction, referral for neuropsychologic
testing is often helpful. Patients’ and family members’
reports of cognitive-behavioral symptoms should be
taken seriously, and if the constraints of office practice
do not allow for the detailed testing of cognitive function, additional resources should be brought to bear,
including the expertise of colleagues in behavioral neurology, neuropsychiatry, and neuropsychology.
(Continued on page 456)

455
Patient with CHRONIC BEHAVIOR CHANGE

A History
B Examinations:
Mental
Medical
Neurologic

Cont’d on p 457

Laboratory studies
Cont’d on p 457

456
C. Laboratory testing, neuroimaging studies, and other
tests are essential to consider as part of the workup
of patients with chronic behavior change. Just as the
cardiologist seeks abnormalities of cardiac structure
and function in the evaluation of a patient with chest
pain, the neurologist should assess the integrity of
brain anatomy (e.g., using MRI) and function (e.g., using positron emission tomography [PET] or single
photon emission computed tomography) in the patient
with behavioral change. Electroencephalography and
lumbar puncture should be considered. Routine
screening for thyroid, nutritional, and metabolic abnormalities is important. Depending on local prevalence patterns, syphilis screening should be considered. The medical context may dictate additional
laboratory studies.
D. AD classically presents as an insidiously progressive
dementia primarily involving memory and executive
function, although other forms of the disease may
present primarily with visuospatial or language dysfunction. No focal signs are usually found on neurologic examination. Some patients with AD present with
affective change, including depression, anxiety, or apathy. Frontotemporal dementia (FTD), much less common than AD and usually presenting at a younger age
(50s or 60s), may present with inappropriate or bizarre
behavior, personality change, language impairment, or
executive dysfunction. This presentation may lead to
erroneous primary psychiatric diagnoses. The neuropathologic process of AD usually preferentially affects
the medial temporal lobe and temporoparietal cortex,
whereas FTD usually involves the frontal and anterior
temporal cortex. These changes are often detectable in
patients as atrophy of these regions on MRI scans or
hypometabolism of these regions on PET. Current
treatments follow the rubric outlined previously, with
cholinesterase inhibitors and Memantine aimed toward improvements in cognitive function.
E. Cerebrovascular dementia may present with a history
of stepwise cognitive decline, often primarily involving executive dysfunction, accompanied in many cases
by focal findings on neurologic examination. A clinical
context involving cerebrovascular risk factors and
neuroimaging evidence of white matter hyperintensities is supportive of this diagnosis. Prophylactic treatment of cerebrovascular risk factors and cholinesterase inhibitors are the current mainstays of therapy.
F. In patients with movement-related symptoms and signs
and cognitive changes including slowed thinking and
inattention, executive dysfunction, often accompanied
by hypophonic or dysarthric speech and apathetic or
depressed appearance, the major diagnoses to consider
are the dementias associated with one of the extrapyramidal syndromes. These include dementia with Lewy
bodies (DLB), Parkinson’s disease (PD), progressive
supranuclear palsy (PSP), corticobasal ganglionic
degeneration (CBD), and Huntington’s disease (HD).

G.

H.

I.

J.

Characteristic features include fluctuating cognition
with pronounced variation in attention and alertness,
well-formed visual hallucinations, and parkinsonism
in DLB; bradykinesia, rigidity, and tremor in PD; eye
movement abnormalities and axial rigidity in PSP;
akinetic rigidity (often asymmetric), apraxia or alien
limb syndrome, and cortical sensory loss in CBD; and
choreoathetosis in HD. Differentiation of these syndromes is often difficult. An empiric trial of levodopa or
other prodopaminergic agents may be beneficial. Avoid
neuroleptics in patients with DLB, given severe sensitivity reactions. Cholinesterase inhibitors may be beneficial, as are symptomatic therapies for behavioral
symptoms, such as depression.
Rapidly progressive cognitive decline accompanied in
some cases by neurologic signs including dysarthria,
gait disturbance, and myoclonus suggests prion
dementias, such as Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Periodic
epileptiform discharges are classically present on electroencephalogram. Treatment is palliative. The triad of
dementia, incontinence, and gait disturbance suggests
normal-pressure hydrocephalus (NPH). Neuroimaging typically demonstrates ventricular enlargement
disproportionate to cerebral atrophy (ex vacuo ventricular enlargement results from cerebral atrophy but
is typically proportionate to atrophy). Removal of a
large volume of cerebrospinal fluid via lumbar puncture or drain may result in transient improvement of
symptoms and suggests potential responsiveness to
ventriculoperitoneal shunt procedure.
Exogenous substances may result in a toxic confusional state. Drugs (prescription or otherwise) commonly cause cognitive difficulties. If possible, eliminate from the patient’s regimen any agents known to
do this (particularly anticholinergic agents). Chronic
alcohol use leads to executive dysfunction. Korsakoff’s
syndrome is primarily an amnesic disorder resulting
from thiamine deficiency, often related to alcoholism.
Other classes of agents capable of inducing cognitive
changes include heavy metals (e.g., arsenic, lead, thallium, manganese, mercury), organic agents (e.g., solvents, organophosphate insecticides), and carbon
monoxide.
Mass lesions, such as frontal lobe tumors or subdural
hematomas, may present primarily with chronic behavior change. In patients with a history of cancer,
consider metastases, carcinomatous meningitis, and
the effects of chemotherapy or radiation therapy. In
paraneoplastic disorders, such as limbic encephalitis,
cognitive and behavior change may be the presenting
symptom prior to the oncologic diagnosis. Primary or
secondary seizure disorders may produce chronic
behavioral changes unrelated to ictal events.
If history and examination are compatible with CNS
infection, consider chronic meningoencephalitis. Nonbacterial infectious agents (e.g., cryptococcal, tuberculous infections) may have a relatively indolent

457
Patient with CHRONIC BEHAVIOR CHANGE
(Cont’d from p 455)

C Laboratory studies
Neuroimaging
Thyroid function
Metabolism
EEG

Examinations

D Dementia

G

E Cerebrovascular

Insidious progression
Memory and executive dysfunction
Medial temporal atrophy
Temporoparietal hypometabolism
Consider AD
Behavior and executive dysfunction
Frontotemporal atrophy
Frontotemporal hypometabolism
Consider frontotemporal dementia
Depression
Psychiatric evaluation, MRI
Other dementias
Prion dementias (e.g., Creutzfeldt-Jacob)
Obtain MRI, EEG
Neurology referral

H Toxins

Medications
Review use
Check levels
Alcohol

F Cognitive impairment

Risk factors:
Stepwise progression
Cerebrovascular dementia
Consider mass lesion
Obtain MRI

I Mass lesions

Metastatic disease in patient
with history of cancer
Consider paraneoplastic syndrome

course. Neurosyphilis should be considered, although
routine serologic screening is no longer recommended
except in endemic regions. Herpes simplex encephalitis classically produces a syndrome of chronic amnesia
and behavior change; many patients who succumb to
viral encephalitides are left with residual cognitive
and behavioral symptoms after acute recovery. Consider HIV dementia in the appropriate setting. Whipple’s disease is an amnesic disorder accompanied by a
pathognomonic movement disorder of the face (oculomasticatory myorhythmia), caused by the intestinal
bacterium Tropheryma whippelii.

Dementia with gait disorder
DLB, PSP, CBD,
parkinsonian dementia
Avoid neuroleptic in DLB

J Chronic infectious/inflammatory process
Obtain MRI
Obtain laboratory studies
Consider lumbar puncture

References
Cummings JL. Alzheimer’s disease. N Engl J Med 2004;351:56–67.
Doody RS, Stevens JC, Beck C, et al. Practice parameter: management
of dementia (an evidence-based review). Report of the Quality
Standards Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology.
Neurology 2001;56:1154–1166.
Knopman DS, DeKosky ST, Cummings JL, et al. Practice parameter:
diagnosis of dementia (an evidence-based review). Report of
the Quality Standards Subcommittee of the American Academy of
Neurology. Neurology 2001;56:1143–1153.
McKeith IG, Dickson DW, Lowe J, et al. Diagnosis and management of
dementia with Lewy bodies. Third report of the DLB consortium.
Neurology 2005;65:1–10.
Mendez MF, Cummings JL. Dementia: A Clinical Approach, 3rd ed.
Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann, 2003.

