CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE

A. Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is defined as glomerular
filtration rate (GFR) !60 ml/min/1.73 m2 or structural/
functional abnormalities of the kidney for "3 months;
kidney disease !3 months’ duration should be evaluated as acute renal failure. The evaluation of the patient
with CKD should begin by verifying the duration of
kidney damage and identifying potentially reversible
causes. Renal ultrasonography should be performed in
all patients to rule out obstruction, which is a potentially reversible cause of kidney disease. Important elements of the past medical history that may provide a
clue to the cause of kidney disease include type 1 or
type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension, rheumatologic
diseases, malignancy, previous surgery involving the
urinary system, viral hepatitis or HIV infection, kidney
stones, and recurrent urinary tract infections. Medication history should include over-the-counter and herbal
preparations. The review of systems should focus on
recent infections; rash; arthralgias or arthritis; and uremic symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, pruritus, sleep
difficulties, poor appetite, and abnormal taste. The
family history may provide important information such
as the possibility of polycystic kidney disease, Fabry’s
disease, and medullary cystic disease. Laboratory evaluation should include serum electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, urinalysis, urine protein:creatinine, and examination of the urine sediment. More targeted laboratory
investigations such as ANAs, serum and urine protein
electrophoresis, complement levels, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, cryoglobulins, and antiglomerular
basement membrane antibodies should be undertaken
in patients with a suggestive history, laboratory results,
or urine sediment. Kidney biopsy can provide definitive
diagnosis in patients for whom a diagnosis would alter
treatment recommendations or inform prognosis.
B. Potentially reversible causes of CKD include obstructive uropathy, drug-induced interstitial nephritis,
Fabry’s disease, multiple myeloma, amyloidosis, and
certain vasculitides and glomerulonephritides.
C. Serum creatinine should be used to determine the
estimated GFR (eGFR) by the following formula:
186 # creatinine-1.154 # age-0.203 (# 0.742 if female
and # 1.212 if black). Stage 1 CKD is defined as

352

normal or elevated GFR ("90 ml/min/1.73 m2) with
kidney damage noted radiographically or on urinalysis (e.g., proteinuria, red cell casts). CKD stages
2–5 are defined as GFR 60–89, 30–59, 15–29, and
!15 ml/min/1.73 m2 (or dialysis), respectively. Medications should be reviewed in patients with reduced
eGFR and adjusted accordingly.
D. CKD may progress toward end-stage renal disease.
Known risk factors include proteinuria, uncontrolled
hypertension, smoking, and obesity. Blood pressure
should be treated to below 130/80 mm/Hg. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin
receptor blockers should be used, particularly in patients with proteinuria. Diuretics are often required for
blood pressure control in patients with CKD. The role
of dietary protein intake is controversial. Consultation
with a nutritionist is recommended, particularly for patients with stage 3 and higher CKD. Patients with stage
4 CKD should be prepared for the possibility of kidney
replacement therapy and referred to a surgeon for
evaluation of vascular access for hemodialysis or peritoneal catheter placement for peritoneal dialysis; early
referral to a kidney transplant center or specialist is recommended.
E. CKD is a major risk factor for cardiovascular disease.
Patients with CKD stages 1–4 should be considered in
the highest-risk category for cardiovascular disease
risk-reduction strategies. These include treatment of
hyperglycemia in patients with diabetes, physical activity, smoking cessation, and use of antiplatelet and lipidlowering drugs in appropriate patients.
F. Anemia, hyperphosphatemia, and secondary hyperparathyroidism frequently accompany CKD, particularly in its later stages. Hemoglobin and iron indices
should be checked regularly in patients with CKD.
Recombinant erythropoietin or related analogs should
be used to treat anemia; oral and/or IV iron may be
necessary for iron deficiency. Treatment of hyperphosphatemia includes dietary modification and the use of
oral phosphate binders. Secondary hyperparathyroidism is treated by controlling hyperphosphatemia and
replacement of vitamin D with either 25-vitamin D (in
deficient patients) or 1,25-vitamin D or its analogs.

353
Patient with CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE

A History, physical examination,
renal ultrasound

B Search for potentially reversible causes

None identified

Identified
Definitely diagnose
and treat

C Estimate stage of CKD by GFR

Stages 1 and 2

Stage 3

Stage 4

Stage 5

Prepare for kidney
replacement therapy

KIDNEY
REPLACEMENT

Measure:
Blood pressure
Urine protein:creatinine
Calcium, phosphorus
Hemoglobin
Fasting lipids
Parathyroid hormone

D

Assess and Treat Risk
Factors for Progression

E

Assess and Treat
Cardiovascular Risk Factors

F

Treat Complications of CKD

References
Fried LF, Katz R, Sarnak MJ, et al. Kidney function as a predictor
of noncardiovascular mortality. J Am Soc Nephrol 2005;16(12):
3728–3735.
Jaber BL, Madias NE. Progression of chronic kidney disease: can it be
prevented or arrested? Am J Med 2005;118(12):1323–1330.
K/DOQI clinical practice guidelines for chronic kidney disease:
evaluation, classification, and stratification. Am J Kidney Dis
2002;39(2 Suppl 1):S1–266.

Levey AS, Bosch JP, Lewis JB, et al. A more accurate method to
estimate glomerular filtration rate from serum creatinine: a new
prediction equation. Modification of Diet in Renal Disease Study
Group. Ann Intern Med 1999;130(6):461–470.
Remuzzi G, Ruggenenti P, Perico N. Chronic renal diseases: renoprotective
benefits of renin-angiotensin system inhibition. Ann Intern Med
2002;136(8):604–615.
Sica D, Carl D. Pathologic basis and treatment considerations in
chronic kidney disease-related hypertension. Semin Nephrol
2005;25(4):246–251.

