CHRONIC MYELOGENOUS LEUKEMIA

Approximately 4300 patients are diagnosed with chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) each year in the United States,
with CML accounting for 14% of all cases of leukemia in
adults. CML occurs with an incidence of 1–2 per 100,000
population, and this incidence is constant worldwide. Males
are more often affected than females, and the median age
at presentation is 45–55 years. One third of the patients are
!60 years of age. CML is uncommon in children and adolescents, accounting for "5% of childhood leukemia.
Although CML results from the malignant transformation of a single cell, the causative factors remain unknown.
Predisposing factors for CML remain largely unidentified,
except that the incidence is significantly higher in survivors
of an atomic blast. The molecular-cytogenetic pathology of
CML has been extensively described. The molecular
events involved in the initiation and transformation of
CML have provided the basis for therapies that have
changed the natural history of the disease. CML has since
become the paradigm for our understanding of leukemogenesis and drug development.
CML is caused by the transforming capability of the
protein products resulting from the Philadelphia translocation, t(9;22)(q34;q11), and the cytogenetic-molecular
changes acquired during clonal evolution and the progression of the disease. Up to 95% of patients express the
Philadelphia chromosome, which results from a reciprocal
translocation between the long arms of chromosomes
9 and 22. This process involves the exchange of genetic
material from a segment of abl (abelson) gene on chromosome 9q34 with a part of bcr (breakpoint cluster region) on
chromosome 22q11, creating a fusion bcr-abl gene on
22q11. Expression of bcr-abl proteins triggers molecular
transformations through increased tyrosine kinase activity.
Uncontrolled activations of kinases initiate downstream
signaling pathways that upregulate transcription of gene
complexes, mediating proliferations and transformation of
CML progenitor cells. Manifestations of CML result from
the unrestrained proliferation of granulocytes.
Classically, the disease pursues a triphasic course. The
chronic phase, which usually lasts 3–5 years, features mild
constitutional symptoms that vanish with therapy. The

260

disease then transforms to an accelerated phase where
drug resistance begins to emerge. Finally, it terminates in
blast crisis.
A. CML is characterized by the expansion of myeloid
progenitor cells at various stages of maturation, their
premature release into the circulation, and their tendency to accumulate in extramedullary sites. In most
patients, CML presents in chronic phase. Symptoms at
presentation often reflect the increase in cell mass and
turnover and may include lethargy, weakness, night
sweats, and weight loss. Occasionally there is abdominal discomfort resulting from splenomegaly. In recent
series up to 50% of patients display no symptoms and
have the diagnosis established through routine blood
counts. Presentation in accelerated or blast phase constitutes "10% of patients.
B. Laboratory manifestations of chronic-phase CML are
myeloid hyperplasia in the marrow and thrombocytosis, neutrophilic leukocytosis, and basophilia in the
peripheral blood. Peripheral blood leukocytosis of
!100,000/µl is seen in 70%–90% of patients. Nucleated RBCs are usually seen in the peripheral blood
smear and help to comprise the leukoerythroblastic
blood picture, which is a nearly universal finding at
diagnosis of the disease.
C. The bone marrow is hypercellular, with a myeloid-toerythroid ratio of between 9:1 and 15:1. Myeloid cells
show all stages of maturation, with a preponderance of
immature precursors. Marrow fibrosis may be patchy
and progress to a diffuse pattern with disease evolution. Metaphase spreads from bone marrow aspiration
are the definitive tests for the Philadelphia translocation. Additional karyotypic abnormalities are observed
with disease progression. Molecular techniques have
now become the mainstay of diagnosis and are utilized
in the monitoring of therapy. Patients receiving therapy are usually followed utilizing the polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) and fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH). Both tests provide a higher degree of sensitivity than conventional cytogenetics.
(Continued on page 262)

261
Patient with Suspected CHRONIC MYELOGENOUS LEUKEMIA

B CBC

A History

Physical examination

C

Bone Marrow Biopsy/Aspiration
Cytogenetics, FISH,
Quantitative PCR for bcr-abl

Diagnosis established
Consider patient age
Assess treatment-related mortality with
allogeneic stem cell transplant

Cont’d on p 263

262
D. The prognosis for patients with CML has changed
dramatically in the past 20 years. Patients diagnosed
with chronic-phase CML now have a median survival
of 5–7 years and up to 9 years if they have a good
prognosis. Therapies such as allogeneic stem cell
transplantation, imatinib, and interferon-# have all
contributed to this progress utilizing risk-adapted
strategies.
E. At the time of diagnosis, most patients with CML are
in the chronic phase. The natural history of CML
invariably leads to blastic transformation directly or,
more frequently, to blastic transformation with an
intervening accelerated phase. Median time from diagnosis to transformation is between 36 and 40 months.
Blastic transformation may result in death within
3–6 months. Transformation is heralded by loss of response to initial therapy and clinical signs such as unexplained lymphadenopathy, fever, progressive splenomegaly, weight loss, and bone and joint pain. One third
of patients have a transformation immunophenotypical
of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and may respond to ALL therapy. The remaining two thirds transform to acute myeloid or acute undifferentiated leukemia and may respond to acute myelogenous leukemia
(AML) regimens.
F. The development of imatinib has revolutionized the
therapeutic approach to CML. Imatinib has been confirmed as an active agent in the treatment of chronic and
transformed phases of CML. It can readily induce complete hematologic remissions (CHR) within 3 months of
the institution of therapy. As the response continues to
evolve, major cytogenetic responses (MCGR) may be
obtained within 6–9 months. Imatinib is the single most
active agent available for the treatment of CML. In a
multinational study of 1106 patients, imatinib proved
superior to a regimen of cytarabine and interferon with
respect to response rates, improved toxicity, and tolerability. Although imatinib is the most effective therapy for
CML, allogeneic stem cell transplantation remains the
only curative therapy available. Hydroxyurea and busulfan used to be commonly used agents in the treatment
of CML, but neither are curative and only rarely result
in a cytogenetic response. Thus, therapy with these two
agents must be regarded as palliative.

G. In carefully selected patients, allogeneic stem cell
transplantation can cure a substantial percentage of
patients who have a suitable donor. Allogeneic stem
cell transplantation results in long-term survival in
50%–80% of patients. Although relapses can occur
following transplantation, this rate is the lowest in
younger patients and those who receive transplants
during the chronic phase of their disease. Infusion of
donor lymphocytes at the time of posttransplant relapse can induce durable and complete molecular remissions. Matched unrelated donor transplants have a
high rate of treatment-related morbidity and mortality. However, highly selected younger patients can
have 5-year survival rates as high as 70%. Early results
of reduced-intensity transplants show rapid engraftment, complete eradication of host hematopoiesis,
and minimal procedure-related toxicities.
Given the availability of imatinib and stem cell
transplantation, the decision on how best to treat
patients with CML remains controversial. Treatment
algorithms need to be continuously updated in light
of emerging data and the development of a second
generation of tyrosine kinase inhibitors that may
overcome resistance to imatinib therapy.

References
Druker BJ, Sawyers CL, Kantarjian H, et al. Activity of a specific inhibitor
of the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase in the blast crisis of chronic myeloid
leukemia and acute lymphoblastic leukemia with the Philadelphia
chromosome. N Engl J Med 2001;344:1038.
Druker BJ, Talpaz M, Resta DJ, et al. Efficacy and safety of a specific inhibitor of the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase in chronic myeloid leukemia.
N Engl J Med 2001;344:1031.
Faderl S, Talpaz M, Estrov Z, et al. The biology of chronic myeloid leukemia. N Engl J Med 1999;341:164.
Jemal A, Murray T, Samuels A, et al. Cancer statistics, 2003. CA Cancer
J Clin 2003;53:5.
Kantarjian HM, Talpaz M, O’Brien S, et al. Dose escalation of imatinib
mesylate can overcome resistance to standard-dose therapy in patients
with chronic myeloid leukemia. Blood 2003;101:473.
Kurzrock R, Kantarjian HM, Druker BJ, et al. Philadelphia chromosomepositive leukemias: from basic mechanism to molecular therapeutics.
Ann Intern Med 2003;138:819.
Qazilbash MH, Devetten MP, Abraham J, et al. Utility of a prognostic
scoring system for allogeneic stem cell transplantation in patients with
chronic myeloid leukemia. Acta Haematol 2003;109:119.

263
Diagnosis established
(Cont’d from p 261)

D Chronic phase

Histocompatible
siblings

E Accelerated phase or
blast transformation

No histocompatible
siblings

Imatinib 800 mg PO qd

G

Therapy:
Imatinib 400 mg PO qd

F Assess response to imatinib:
CHR by 3 mo
MCGR by 9–12 mo

Yes

No

Continue Imatinib with
Quarterly Monitoring

Increase Imatinib to
600–800 mg PO qd

Allogeneic Stem
Cell Transplantation

