CHRONIC HEADACHE


Chronic headache is a common complaint (5% of the general population) and, although benign, has a significant
negative impact on the quality of life of sufferers and on
health care resource utilization. Many patients with chronic
headache have comorbid illnesses that require concurrent
evaluation and treatment, such as depression, dysthymia,
bipolar disorder, anxiety, and fibromyalgia.
A. A careful history is the most important aspect in the
evaluation of patients with headache because there are
no diagnostic tests for most headache disorders. Important aspects of the history include rapidity of onset, location, the character and temporal pattern of the pain,
symptoms of systemic illness, change in pattern of
headache, and focal neurologic complaints. The medical
context is crucial, including patient age, medical history,
and risk factors for other illnesses. Imaging and diagnostic studies maybe necessary to rule out causes of secondary headaches such as brain tumors, meningitis, and
sinus disease. Sinus headache commonly causes facial
pain, and prognosis is good if recognized and treated
properly. Typically, pain is located in the forehead, bridge
of nose, or cheeks and is usually of a dull-pressure quality
and associated with nasal congestion. Sinus CT may be
needed to rule out chronic bacterial sinusitis. A careful
search for allergens or irritants should be done. Treatment includes corticosteroid nasal spray, antihistamines,
and antibiotics.
B. Migraine headaches are more common in women
(3 to 1), with onset before age 50 years and relatively
high prevalence (as high as 12.6% in some populations).
Classic migraine is a headache preceded by a focal neurologic deficit, usually lasting 15–30 minutes. The most
common auras are visual, but sensory, motor, speech, or
brainstem symptoms may occur. The headache is usually
unilateral; throbbing in quality; and accompanied by
nausea and/or vomiting, photophobia, and phonophobia.

Migraines may have specific identifiable triggers in some
patients, such as physical activity, stress, menstrual cycle,
alcohol, and caffeine withdrawal. The headache pain
may last hours to a few days.
C. Individuals who have !3 migraines per month usually
can be treated with abortive and symptomatic medications only. The most effective abortive agents are triptans (selective serotonin agonists); isometheptene, usually in combination with dichloralphenazone; high doses
of NSAIDs; or dihydroergotamine. Symptomatic medications include antiemetics, NSAIDs, mild tranquilizers, and narcotic analgesics.
D. Patients with "3 migraines per month are candidates
for prophylactic medications, including beta blockers,
tricyclic antidepressants, calcium channel blockers,
or anticonvulsants (valproic acid, topiramate). Each
prophylactic agent should be given in adequate doses
and for 3–4 weeks before its effectiveness can be
determined.
E. Cluster headaches are severe, unilateral (usually periorbital), sharp, steady (not throbbing) pain episodes
that are of relatively short duration (30–120 minutes).
Classically, they are nocturnal, often awakening
the patient from sleep, but may recur many times
throughout a 24-hour period. They are more common
in men (14 to 1), may be precipitated by alcohol ingestion, and are usually associated with autonomic
symptoms (lacrimation, rhinorrhea, conjunctival injection, nasal congestion, forehead and facial sweating,
ptosis, or miosis). The attacks occur in clusters, each
cluster lasting 2 weeks to 3 months, with an average of
2 months. Acute headaches can be treated with sumatriptan, ergotamine, and high-flow oxygen. Because of
their severity, prophylactic therapy is recommended
for all patients and includes verapamil, lithium, valproic acid, or, rarely, prednisone.
(Continued on page 406)

404

405
Patient with CHRONIC HEADACHE

A Careful headache history
Course

Episodic

Constant
Cont’d on p 407

Unilateral
throbbing

Aura

B Classic

No aura

migraine

Common
migraine

Assess
frequency

Unilateral
nonthrobbing

Bilateral

Associated
symptoms

Throbbing

Nonthrobbing

Common
migraine

Tension
Cervical
arthritis

Lacrimation
Rhinorrhea
Ptosis

E Cluster

headache

Lithium
Ergots
Oxygen
Prednisone
Verapamil
Methysergide
Valproic Acid

C !3/mo
Abortive
Treatment:
Ergots
Midrin
NSAIDs
Sumatriptan

D "3/mo
Prophylaxis:
Beta blockers
Calcium
Channel
Blockers
Tricyclic
Antidepressants
Methysergide
Valproic Acid

Tender
temporal
artery
Age " 50 yr

Exclude:
Temporal
arteritis
Check ESR
(p 402)

406
F. Medication-overuse headaches are very common. They
arise from use of analgesics (acetaminophen or aspirin), narcotics, ergotamine, or those combined with
caffeine and minor tranquilizers. Chronic, daily overuse causes a cycle of treatment and withdrawal that
perpetuates and escalates the headache. Some patients
require hospitalization during the withdrawal period
for symptomatic treatment of the often severe withdrawal headaches and the associated nausea, vomiting,
and dehydration. An aggressive prophylactic treatment
program may be necessary after withdrawal of analgesics. One of the most common such headaches is caffeine overuse, and slow tapering of caffeine is often
extremely effective.
G. Patients with ergotamine dependency have daily or
almost-daily headaches alleviated only by ergotamine.
When attempts to discontinue the ergotamine are
made, a severe and protracted withdrawal headache
occurs. Prophylactic medications usually are ineffective while the excessive ergotamine use continues.
These patients usually require hospitalization. An effective treatment of the withdrawal headache consists
of IV phenothiazines or metoclopramide and IV dihydroergotamine. Once the patient has been withdrawn
from the ergotamine, institute an aggressive prophylactic regimen.
H. Tension headache has a lifetime prevalence of 69% in
men and 88% in women. The pain level is mild to

moderate, intermittent, and usually worse in the late
afternoon, and it lasts for several hours. The location is
typically bilateral and diffuse, often in a bandlike
pattern across the forehead or the back of the head.
Pain is described as tightness or pressure and associated with neck muscle tightness and often precipitated
by emotional stress. There is rarely nausea, vomiting,
photophobia, or phonophobia. Carefully search for
aggravating or precipitating factors. Relaxation and
biofeedback can reduce the severity and frequency of
the headaches. Some patients may require prophylactic medications such as muscle relaxants (tizanidine),
tricyclic antidepressants, or beta blockers.
References
Bigal ME, Sheftell FD, Rapoport AM, et al. Chronic daily headache in a
tertiary care population: correlation between the International Headache Society diagnostic criteria and proposed revisions of criteria for
chronic daily headache. Cephalalgia 2002;22(6):432–438.
Castillo J, Munoz P, Guitera V, et al. Epidemiology of chronic daily
headache in the general population. Headache 1999;39(3):190–196.
Curioso EP, Young WB, Shechter AL, et al. Psychiatric comorbidity
predicts outcome in chronic daily headache patients. Neurology
1999;52(6):471.
Guitera V, Munoz P, Castillo J, et al. Quality of life in chronic daily headache:
a study in a general population. Neurology 2002;58(7):1062–1065.
Ryan CW. Evaluation of patients with chronic headache (review). Am
Fam Physician 1996;54:1051.

407
Constant
(Cont’d from p 405)
Neurologic
examination

F Analgesic
overuse

Analgesic
rebound
headache
Stop analgesics
Consider:
Hospitalization

Normal

Abnormal

Careful
medication
history

Full
neurologic
evaluation

G Ergotamine

dependency

Stop ergotamine
tartrate
Consider:
Hospitalization

H Tension

Tricyclic
Antidepressants
Beta blockers
Biofeedback
Stress Reduction

