CHRONIC PAIN

A. The information needed to evaluate the patient includes a detailed history of the pain complaint(s), an
understanding of pain characteristics, response to past
treatments, a thorough understanding of the patient’s
history (i.e., a review of the often voluminous medical
records and psychosocial history), and the temporal
relationship of all these factors to the onset and exacerbation of pain.
B. Acute pain often is associated with an increase in circulation, ventilation, and metabolism and a decrease in
urinary and GI function. Patients are in obvious pain,
and often there are associated findings of pallor, diaphoresis, and nausea.
C. Chronic pain is defined as any pain continuing beyond
the usual course of an acute injury process. It can be
dangerous to place an arbitrary time limit, such as
6 months, on this definition. For example, the pain of
a broken wrist should last, at most, 2 weeks. Any continuing pain may indicate a reflex sympathetic dystrophy. This is a cause of chronic pain in which early
recognition and treatment lead to complete recovery.
Waiting 6 months to consider this pain chronic could
leave the patient with a permanent disability. Patients
with constant pain develop vegetative signs: disturbances in sleep and appetite, constipation, increased
irritability, decreased libido, psychomotor retardation,
and lowered pain tolerance. Patients with intermittent
chronic pain (e.g., those with recurrent bouts of neuralgia, headaches, or angina) may have responses similar to those with acute pain.
D. Chronic benign pain is a diagnostic and management
challenge. If possible, it sometimes is useful to localize
the pain to the target organ most affected.
E. Some patients do not fit nicely into any of the usual
chronic benign pain subcategories. The approach to
this group of patients needs to be individualized.
F. All patients with chronic pain go through proven psychological changes while coping with their pain. Psychological and environmental factors play a great role
in chronic pain, with 30% of patients becoming clinically depressed. However, psychogenic pain occurs
when the pain is a result of psychological mechanisms.
The fact that a physician cannot find a specific organic
cause for the pain is insufficient, by itself, to warrant a
psychiatric diagnosis. Positive evidence for a psychiatric diagnosis must be found. (DSM-IV criteria should
be applied.)
G. A multidisciplinary pain center (MPC) should have on its
staff a variety of health care providers capable of
22

assessing and treating physical, psychosocial, medical,
vocational, and social aspects of chronic pain. A multidisciplinary pain team may include an internist, pschiatrist,
physiatrist, pharmacist, anesthesiologist, neurosurgeon,
nurse, dentist, psychologist, physical therapist, and occupational therapist. At least three medical specialties
should be represented on the staff of an MPC. If one of
the physicians is not a psychiatrist, physicians from two
specialties and a clinical psychologist are the minimum
required. The MPC may exist in either an inpatient or
outpatient setting. An MPC should establish protocols
for patient management and assess their efficiency periodically. With benign pain the emphasis should be on
pain management and rehabilitation, with little or no use
of controlled medications. Many anesthesiologists specialize in chronic pain; however, do not expect a comprehensive approach by these practitioners. They may be
useful for some procedures such as epidurals, but their
approach is usually too focused.
H. Effective pain management requires consistent strategies: (1) establishing treatment goals in terms of outcomes with a definite timeline, (2) regularly scheduling
follow-up appointments, (3) establishing medication
refill guidelines, and (4) establishing patient behavior
guidelines. You need to be familiar with your state
board of medical examiners regulations. If your state
board does not have explicit regulations, you can find
explicit regulations and useful forms at the Arizona
Board of Medical Examiners website (www.azmd.
gov—click on the Physician Center drop down and go
to guidelines for opioid prescribing).
I. This group of patients may cause licensing and legal
headaches unless certain guidelines are followed.
• Do an initial comprehensive clinical examination,
which results in an explicit working diagnosis.
• Call the last treating physician and discuss the case.
• Review all outside records.
• Establish a written treatment plan with recorded
measurable objectives.
• If habituating medications are used, informed consent must be given and the physician must make
explicit the material risks of treatment, including alternative treatments, treatment side effects and potential interactions, risk of tolerance, how to withdraw treatment, risk of addiction, and risk of impaired
judgment.
• Review current treatment and modify as indicated.
• Consult as indicated.
• Be comprehensive and compulsive in record keeping.

23
Patient with PAIN

A History

Physical examination

C Chronic pain

B Acute pain
Identify source

D Benign pain

Malignant pain

Appropriate
Treatment
Multidisciplinary
Management:
Narcotics
Neurosurgical
Intervention
Anesthesia
Intervention
Physical Therapy

Head and
neck pain

Pelvic
pain

Back/extremities

E Individualized

F Psychogenic

G Most effectively

handled in MPC

H Emphasis on pain management
and rehabilitation with
little or no narcotic medication

I Follow guidelines to

stay out of trouble
with licensing agencies

References
Arnold RM, Han PK, Seltzer D. Opioid contracts in chronic nonmalignant pain management: objectives and uncertainties. Am J Med
2006;119:292.
Ballantye JC, Mad J. Opioid therapy for chronic pain. N Engl J Med
2003;349:1943–1953.
Godfrey RG. A guide to the understanding and use of tricyclic antidepressants in the overall management of fibromyalgia and other chronic

pain syndromes. Arch Intern Med 1996;156:1047.
Levy MH. Pharmacologic treatment of cancer pain. N Engl J Med
1996;335:1124.
Portenoy RK. Opioid therapy for chronic nonmalignant pain: a review of
the critical issues. J Pain Symptom Manage 1996;11:203.
Vasudevan SV, Lynch NT. Pain centers: organization and outcome. In
Rehabilitation medicine—adding life to years (special issue). West J
Med 1991;154:532.

