CHRONIC DIARRHEA


Diarrhea is defined as the passage of stool with liquid consistency and weight !200 g/day. It becomes chronic when
symptoms persist for !4 weeks.
The common pathophysiologic mechanism of diarrhea is
an incomplete absorption of water from the lumen. This can
occur in several ways, such as reduced rate of net water absorption (abnormal electrolyte secretion), intraluminal osmotic water retention (osmotic load), decreased mucosal
surface area, and abnormalities in intestinal motility. Several
classifications for the clinician guide the evaluation of diarrhea. A practical and widely used approach to facilitate the
diagnosis is based on stool characteristics. Chronic diarrhea is
then subdivided into watery, inflammatory, or fatty in nature.
A. A detailed medical history is essential for the evaluation of chronic diarrhea. It is important to differentiate
functional from organic disorders. A functional etiology may be suggested in the absence of significant
unintentional weight loss, nocturnal symptoms, or persistence of symptoms for !1 year. Onset of symptoms,
specific patterns, duration, and aggravating/alleviating
factors should always be investigated. It is also essential to inquire about a previous history of radiation
therapy, prior abdominal surgery, and antibiotic or
other medication use because these are common
causes of iatrogenic diarrhea. Medication use has been
described as the causative factor in up to 4% of patients with chronic diarrhea. The clinician should elicit
a history of specific stool characteristics such as the
presence of blood, mucus, oil droplets, or undigested
food particles. Other coexisting symptoms, including
abdominal pain, cramps, fever, excessive flatulence,
and bloating, should be further investigated. Other
systemic illnesses such as AIDS, diabetes, and thyroid
and collagen vascular diseases may play a contributory
role in patients with chronic diarrhea. Dietary habits
and the presence of food additives (sorbitol, mannitol,
and fructose) should also be discussed. Recent travel,
sexual history, occupation, source of drinking water,
and alcohol or illicit drug abuse are other pertinent
pieces of information in the history.
B. On physical examination, prompt determination of the
severity of symptoms is mandatory and is initially more
important than obtaining a specific diagnosis. A good
place to start is to evaluate the patient’s intravascular
volume status. If detected, dehydration and electrolyte
imbalances should be addressed and corrected immediately. A careful abdominal examination should be
204

performed, noting absence or presence of abdominal
sounds, bruits, fluid, organomegaly, or palpable masses.
A rectal examination may reveal pelvic or sphincter dysfunction. The physical examination can also help in identifying systemic causes of diarrhea such as right-sided
heart murmurs, enlarged hard liver and flushing (carcinoid), arthritis (inflammatory bowel disease, Whipple’s,
and other enteric infections), dermatitis herpetiformis
(celiac sprue), and pyoderma gangrenosum or erythema
nodosum (inflammatory bowel disease [IBD]).
C. Routine laboratory studies should be obtained as part
of the initial evaluation. These include a CBC, electrolytes, thyroid function tests, and a screen for celiac
disease. Other studies are also complementary to initial testing. Stool analysis is crucial in the evaluation of
chronic diarrhea. These samples can be obtained in a
random sample or a timed collection.
• 24- to 48-hour collection samples are preferred so
that stool volume, weight, and different components
can be accurately measured.
• Fecal leukocytes and lactoferrin (iron-binding glycoprotein) are important diagnostic tools for detecting
inflammatory diarrhea. This can be secondary to an
infectious cause, IBD, or microscopic colitis.
• Fecal occult blood testing is nonspecific. The utility
of this test for detecting inflammatory and neoplastic
pathology in chronic diarrhea has not been established. Conditions such as celiac sprue, small bowel
lymphoma, and refractory sprue have been associated with positive guaiac results.
• Stool fat is used to determine the presence of steatorrhea, which is defined as a loss of fat in stool !7 g or
9% of fat intake in 24 hours. A minimal consumption
of 70–100 g of fat per day is mandatory for quantitative studies. Fat excretion !14 g per day is strongly
suggestive of fat malabsorption. A qualitative Sudan
III stain test can predict 90% of patients with clinically significant steatorrhea.
• Stool osmotic gap is used to differentiate an osmotic
from a secretory type of diarrhea. This is determined
by the electrolyte concentration in the stool water,
using the following formula: 290 " 2(Na # K). If the
osmotic gap is small ($50), unabsorbed electrolytes
retain water in the lumen, which is characteristic of
secretory diarrhea. However, if the osmotic gap is
large (!125), the nonelectrolyte content in the lumen
is accounted for by the retained water, being more
consistent with an osmotic diarrhea.
(Continued on page 206)

205
Patient with CHRONIC DIARRHEA

A History
Onset:
Congenital
Abrupt
Gradual
Pattern:
Continous
Intermittent
Duration
Epidemiology:
Travel
Food
Water

Stool
characteristics:
Watery
Bloody
Fatty
Fecal
incontinence

Abdominal pain:
IBD
Irritable
bowel syndrome
Ischemia
Weight loss:
Malabsorption
Neoplasm

Iatrogenic
Aggravating
diarrhea:
factors:
Drugs
Diet
Radiation
Stress
Surgery
Mitigating
Factitious
factors:
diarrhea:
Diet
Laxatives
OTC drugs
Rx drugs
Previous
evaluation

Systemic diseases:
Hyperthyroidism
Diabetes mellitus
Collagen vascular
diseases
Tumor syndromes
AIDS
lmmunoglobulin
deficiencies

B Physical examination

General:
Fluid balance
Nutrition

Thyroid:
Skin:
Mass
Flushing
Rashes
Dermatographism

Chest:
Wheezing

Heart:
Abdomen:
Anorectal:
Extremities:
Murmur
Hepatomegaly
Sphincter
Edema
Mass
competence
Ascites
Fecal occult
Tenderness
blood test

C Routine laboratory tests
CBC:
Anemia
Leukocytosis

Chemistry screen:
Fluid/electrolyte status
Nutritional status
Serum protein/globulin

Stool analysis

Weight

Electrolytes:
Osmotic gap

pH:
Carbohydrate
malabsorption

Fecal occult
blood test:
Bleeding

Categorize
Cont’d on p 207

Stool WBCs:
Inflammation

Fat output:
Sudan stain
Quantitative

Laxative
screen

Celiac
testing

206
• The measurement of stool osmolality has no use in
calculating the osmotic gap. Osmolality values $290
mOsm/kg generally indicate contamination of the
stool with water or hypotonic urine.
• Stool pH $5.3 indicates carbohydrate malabsorption.
When proper carbohydrate absorption fails to take
place in the small intestine, excessive bacterial fermentation occurs in the colon, creating a more acidic
environment and reducing stool pH.
• Chemical and chromatographic methods can be used
to confirm the surreptitious ingestion of laxatives. In
these cases, watery stool can either have a secretory or osmotic component. Fecal concentration of
substances such as phosphate, sulfate, magnesium
phenolphthalein, and reducing substances can be
measured.
• Carbohydrate and protein content can also be tested
in stool. However, these are not routinely recommended unless the results would directly alter the
management of the patient. These include alpha1-antitrypsin to look for protein-losing enteropathy
and d-xylose absorption test to evaluate specific mucosal defects rather than pancreatic digestive defects.
• Serologic testing for celiac disease is recommended
on a routine basis in patients with chronic diarrhea.
Measurements of tissue transglutaminase and immunoglobulin A (IgA) antiendomysial antibodies are
part of this evaluation.
• Urine testing is useful when carcinoid or pheochromocytoma is suspected. These include measurements
of urine levels of 5-HIAA (5-hydroxyindole acetic
acid), vanillylmandelic acid (VMA), and histamine
(mast cell disease and foregut carcinoids).
• Serum testing for peptide hormones is indicated
when causes such as Zollinger-Ellison syndrome,
glucagonoma, neuroendocrine vasoactive intestinal
peptide (VIP)-producing tumors, or thyroid medullary carcinoma are suspected.
• Other specific physiologic tests are available once a
particular diagnosis is pursued.
D. Watery diarrhea is subdivided into two main categories: secretory and osmotic. In secretory diarrhea, infection should be excluded as an initial step. This can
be done by performing stool cultures for bacteria and
other organisms, such as Aeromonas, Plesiomonas,
microsporidia, Giardia, coccidian, cryptosporidium,
and standard ova and parasites. Subsequently, structural diseases such as short gut syndrome, gastrocolic

or enteroenteric fistulas, IBD, and malignancies can be
diagnosed with radiologic testing (small bowel series
or CT scan of the abdomen) and endoscopic studies
with biopsy when possible esophagogastroduodenoscopy [EGD]), colonoscopy, or capsule endoscopy).
Serologic and other specific testing should be ordered
for each suspected diagnosis.
E. Osmotic diarrhea has a more limited diagnosis. It is
usually secondary to the ingestion of exogenous magnesium, consumption of poorly absorbed carbohydrates, or carbohydrate malabsorption. Magnesium
directly measured in the stool !44 mmol/L is suggestive of laxative abuse.
F. The underlying abnormality present in inflammatory
diarrhea is disruption and inflammation of the mucosa.
This can be secondary to inflammatory bowel disease,
infections, medications (NSAIDs, chemotherapy),
pseudomembranous colitis, ischemia, radiation enterocolitis, and neoplasia. Sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy
with biopsy may be indicated to evaluate for structural
changes, depending on the clinical circumstances.
G. Fatty diarrhea (or steatorrhea) can be secondary to a
maldigestive or a malabsorptive process. Within this
category, the three most common related conditions
are celiac sprue, pancreatic insufficiency, and bacterial
overgrowth. Once this is established, endoscopic studies with small bowel biopsies are necessary to exclude
structural disease. If the latter has been excluded, imaging studies of the pancreas are mandatory to evaluate for pancreatic causes. There is no optimal test to
assess pancreatic function. Therefore, a therapeutic
trial of pancreatic enzyme supplementation with an
objective measurement of a response may be the “optimal” physiologic testing.

References
American Gastroenterological Association medical position statement:
guidelines for the evaluation and management of chronic diarrhea.
Gastroenterology 1999;116:1461–1486.
Headstrom PD, Surawcicz CM. Chronic diarrhea. Clin Gastroenterol
Hepatol 2005;3:734–737.
Schiller LR. Chronic diarrhea. Gastroenterology 2004;127:287–293.
Schiller LR, Sellin JH. Diarrhea. In Feldman M, Friedman LS, Sleisenger
MH, eds. Sleisenger and Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease:
Pathophysiology, Diagnosis and Management, 7th ed. Philadelphia:
Saunders, 2002:131–153.
Thomas PD, Forbes A, Green J, et al. Guidelines for the investigation of
chronic diarrhoea, 2nd ed. Gut 2003;52 Suppl 5:v1–15.

207
Categorize
(Cont’d from p 205)

F Inflammatory

Watery
diarrhea

D Secretory
diarrhea

Exclude
infection

Bacterial
pathogens:
“Standard”
Aeromonas
Plesiomonas

Other pathogens:
“Standard” ova #
parasites
Coccidia
Microsporidia
Giardia antigen

Exclude
structural
disease
Small bowel
radiographs

diarrhea
Stool
analysis

Small bowel
radiographs

Sigmoidoscopy
or colonoscopy
with biopsy

Selective testing

Small bowel
biopsy

Exclude
structural
disease

High Mg output:
Inadvertent ingestion
Laxative abuse
Bacterial
pathogens:
“Standard”
Aeromonas
Plesiomonas
Tuberculosis

Small bowel
radiographs

Urine:
Other tests:
5-HIAA
TSH
Metanephrines
ACTH stimulation
Histamine
Serum protein
electrophoresis
Immunoglobulins

Cholestyramine
trial for bile acid
diarrhea

CT scan
of abdomen

Exclude
infection

Low pH:
Carbohydrate
malabsorption

Dietary review
Breath H2 test
(lactose)
Lactase assay

diarrhea

Exclude
structural
disease

E Osmotic

Sigmoidoscopy CT scan
Small bowel
or colonoscopy of abdomen biopsy and
with biopsy
aspirate for
quantitative
culture

Plasma peptides:
Gastrin
Calcitonin
VIP
Somatostatin

G Fatty

diarrhea

Other pathogens:
Parasites
Viruses

CT scan of
abdomen

Small bowel
biopsy and
aspirate for
quantitative
culture

Exclude pancreatic
exocrine insufficiency

Secretin
test

Bentiromide
test

Stool
chymotrypsin
activity

Initial efforts should be directed to classification of chronic diarrhea based on history, physical examination, basic laboratory test results, and
stool analysis. Further evaluation is made for secretory diarrhea (D), osmotic diarrhea (E), inflammatory diarrhea (F), and fatty diarrhea (G).
It is not necessary to perform every test in a given pathway once a diagnosis is reached. TSH, Thyroid-stimulating hormone; ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone. Modified from American Gastroenterological Association medical position statement: guidelines for the evaluation and
management of chronic diarrhea. Gastroenterology 1999;116:1461–1486.

