Claudication, the symptom of exertional (typically lower) limb discomfort that resolves with rest, is a common problem among elderly patients, estimated to involve up to 10% of patients >70 years. Claudication is generally caused by atherosclerotic blockages of the arteries of the limbs, termed peripheral arterial disease (PAD). Epidemiologic research has demonstrated that the prevalence of PAD goes far beyond patients with typical claudication to include patients with atypical leg symptoms, patients with abnormalities of gait, and patients with no leg symptoms at all. In fact, most patients with PAD do not have the classic symptom of claudication. Given the limited reliability of a history of claudication for diagnosing all patients with PAD, the ankle-brachial index (ABI) is a critical clinical tool to identify PAD. This review will focus on the approach to management of claudication. The management of the patient with asymptomatic PAD or with atypical leg symptoms is beyond the scope of this review, although general principles apply.
A. The history and physical examination are important components of the evaluation of the patient with suspected claudication. The history should focus on whether the leg symptoms are typical for claudication or whether they are more consistent with an alternative diagnosis. Claudication is a sensation of leg discomfort that comes on with a predictable amount of exertion and typically resolves within 5 minutes of rest. The discomfort may be unilateral or bilateral and may involve the buttocks, hips, thighs, or calves, depending on the anatomic location of arterial blockages. It is crucial to determine whether limb discomfort occurs at rest or only with exertion. Discomfort that occurs at rest may represent critical limb ischemia (CLI), a vascular urgency. A complete cardiovascular (CV) review of systems is important, because many patients with PAD also have occult coronary artery and cerebrovascular disease. Patients should also be asked about erectile dysfunction, neurologic symptoms, and postprandial abdominal pain (a symptom of mesenteric ischemia). A detailed smoking history must be obtained along with assessment of all other risk factors for atherosclerosis. The physical examination should include a comprehensive vascular examination, including measurement of blood pressures in both arms, palpation of the major pulses of the upper and lower extremities, and auscultation for bruits. The absence of a pedal pulse is suggestive of PAD in the patient who presents with exertional leg symptoms. The posterior tibial pulse is a more specific indicator of PAD, as the dorsalis pedis pulse is congenitally absent or anomalous in upward of 10% of patients. Careful inspection of the feet, with shoes and socks removed, is critical. Ischemic ulcers may occur on the foot or the heel or in between the toes ("kissing ulcers"). Other physical findings consistent with the presence of PAD include hair loss, diminished skin temperature, and elevation pallor of the symptomatic extremity.
B. The ABI is the cornerstone of diagnosis of PAD. The ABI should be measured with the patient in the supine position after a rest period of at least 5 minutes. A standard blood pressure cuff and handheld Doppler device are used to measure systolic blood pressure in both arms (brachial pressures) and at each ankle. The cuff is placed directly above the ankle. Systolic pressures are measured by listening over both the posterior tibial and dorsalis pedis arteries. The ABI for each leg is the ratio of the higher ankle pressure (dorsalis pedis or posterior tibial) over the higher of the two arm pressures. A normal resting ABI is generally defined as falling between 0.91 and 1.3, although a truly normal value should be ≥1.1. An ABI of ≤0.9 is diagnostic of PAD. An ABI >1.3 is also abnormal and is due to artifact from noncompressible vessels. This is a relatively common finding in diabetic patients and in patients with end-stage renal disease. An ABI of >1.3 is not interpretable, and an alternative diagnostic study should be obtained, such as measurement of the toe-brachial index, pulse volume recordings, or a magnetic resonance angiogram (MRA) or computed tomographic angiogram (CTA) of the lower extremities.
C. The presence of a normal ABI at rest, particularly if it is within the 0.91–1.1 range, does not exclude the possibility that a patient has PAD as the cause of his or her leg symptoms. In some patients with mild disease, or disease localized to the aortoiliac segment, the ABI may be normal at rest but may fall during exercise. Formal exercise testing protocols are in place in most vascular laboratories. A patient walks on a treadmill, using a standardized protocol, until the occurrence of leg symptoms or until the protocol has been completed. The ABI is remeasured with the patient in the supine position as soon as possible after exercise is completed. Any fall in ankle pressure after exercise is abnormal. The ABI will often fall by ≥20% in a patient with PAD who experiences claudication during the test. A simple bedside alternative to formal exercise testing is to measure the ABI at rest and then ask the patient to perform a series of standing calf raises until leg discomfort is provoked. The ABI in the symptomatic leg is then remeasured.
D. In most cases of claudication, the clinical evaluation and ABI complete the diagnostic workup for PAD. In the author's practice, an ABI along with measurement of segmental leg pressures and pulse volume recordings is routinely obtained in the vascular laboratory. In the author's practice, the use of additional diagnostic imaging, such as MRA, arterial duplex ultrasound, or CTA is limited to cases in which additional anatomic information is required. Settings in which additional imaging for claudication is obtained would include evaluation of PAD in a patient without risk factors for atherosclerosis when an unusual arterial disorder is suspected (e.g., Takayasu's arteritis, fibromuscular dysplasia, arterial entrapment syndrome), there is suspected aneurysmal disease, or arterial anatomy needs to be defined to delineate revascularization options, as well as for follow-up after lower extremity revascularization.
E. If PAD has been excluded as the cause of the patient's limb symptoms, a number of alternative diagnoses should be considered, depending upon the nature of the patient's symptoms. The differential diagnosis of leg pain is broad and includes lumbar canal stenosis (pseudoclaudication), osteoarthritis, venous disease, and painful peripheral neuropathy. Similarly, alternative diagnoses must be considered for a patient with a leg or foot ulcer and a normal resting ABI. The most common causes of nonischemic limb ulcers are venous insufficiency and diabetes mellitus-associated neuropathy.
F. Myocardial infarction and stroke are the leading causes of death among patients with PAD. As such, aggressive CV risk factor modification is critical for all patients with claudication, as well as for patients with PAD who have CLI, are asymptomatic, or have atypical leg symptoms. Specifically, patients should receive an antiplatelet drug (aspirin or clopidogrel), a statin, and rigorous blood pressure control. Smoking cessation is vital for improvement in limb-related outcomes and for the prevention of CV events. Diabetic patients with PAD should achieve appropriate glycemic control, often with the input of an endocrine specialist.
G. A patient with rest pain of an extremity, a nonhealing ulcer, or gangrene in the setting of an abnormal ABI has CLI. The ABI in these patients is typically <0.4. Patients with PAD and diabetes mellitus and those who continue to smoke are at particularly increased risk of developing CLI. CLI is a vascular urgency with the potential for loss of limb and a high rate of CV morbidity. The clinician must vigilantly follow all patients with claudication for the development of CLI. Deterioration to CLI can occur in previously stable patients, including those who had initially responded to conservative therapy. Although atypical, some patients with claudication may also present with a nonhealing ulcer in the absence of ischemic rest pain. All patients with CLI should be urgently referred to a vascular specialist for evaluation for revascularization.
H. For most patients, the initial management of claudication includes a trial of medical therapy. All patients should receive counseling regarding proper foot care. Supervised exercise training programs are highly successful at improving exercise capacity among claudicants, although they are not widely available. Patients with PAD should be advised to begin a walking program with a goal of walking for one-half hour (does not include rest periods) 5 times per week. Of the two FDA-approved medications available for the treatment of claudication (cilostazol and pentoxifylline), there is stronger efficacy data in support of the use of cilostazol. Cilostazol is contraindicated for use among patients with congestive heart failure.
I. If a patient with claudication does not experience improvement in leg symptoms with conservative therapy, particularly if there is substantial impairment of quality of life or functional capabilities, he or she should be referred to a vascular specialist for revascularization. During the past two decades, there have been great advances in catheter-based techniques, which allow for nonsurgical revascularization of many patients. Carefully selected patients with severely disabling symptoms or vocational disability caused by claudication may be considered for revascularization as first-line therapy, particularly if the patient has favorable anatomy for a catheter-based procedure. Patients with aortoiliac disease or short segment lesions of the femoral vessels are the most attractive candidates for catheter-based therapies.

