CLINICAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR STEM CELL TRANSPLANTATION


Surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy, the traditional
pillars of cancer therapy, offer significant improvements
in survival and quality of life for patients with malignancies. Although refinements of technique and new agents
offer some hope for additional advances, it is likely that
further progress in treatment outcome will come from
other sources, particularly those that exploit the unique
biology of cancer. Recent dramatic successes with agents
such as imatinib for the treatment of chronic myelogenous
leukemia offer the tantalizing prospect of “magic bullet”
treatments that are simple and highly effective, but such
breakthroughs are likely to be limited to only a very few
diagnoses for the foreseeable future.
One of the first “biological” therapies, bone marrow
transplantation, was pioneered almost half a century ago
with the initial concept of replacing a diseased organ such
as a leukemic marrow with a normal one. Identification of
additional sources of cells in peripheral and umbilical cord
blood have significantly expanded options in a field now
collectively referred to as “stem cell transplantation.” In all
its forms, stem cell transplantation has the primary and
simplistic goal of restoring blood production after aggressive treatment with chemotherapy with or without additional radiation. In autologous stem cell transplantation,
cells are harvested from the patient in advance and restoration of blood production is the sole goal of the “transplant,” which may be better considered a simple rescue
from otherwise potentially fatal hematologic toxicities associated with aggressive dosing of chemotherapy required

282

to cure or at least significantly extend survival in diseases
such as myeloma and lymphoma.
Allogeneic stem cell transplantation derives cells from
another donor for the transplant. Identical twins served as
the first successful donors for hematopoietic transplants,
but with the characterization of the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) system of transplant antigens, appropriately
matched siblings could be identified to serve as donors in
successful transplants. Refinements in the molecular characterization of HLA antigens, the development of extensive registries of volunteer adult donors, and rapidly expanding banks of cord blood cells now allow many patients
who do not have a suitably matched sibling to identify an
adequately matched unrelated donor for transplant.
Even when donor cells are well matched, outside of
identical twin transplants there will be “minor” histocompatibility differences between donor and recipient. The risk
of rejection has been minimized with modern preparative
regimens, but a reverse immunologic reaction of donor
cells against normal host tissues is common in allogeneic
transplantation—so-called graft versus host disease, or
GVHD. In its severe forms, GVHD can be fatal and has
been as important as infections in limiting the historical
success of allogeneic transplantation, particularly in patients !50 years of age. Better matching of donor and recipient, improved prophylactic pharmacologic regimens for
GVHD, and recently the use of less aggressive or “reduced
intensity” chemotherapy and radiation regimens preceding
the transplant have reduced the impact of GVHD and

283
allowed transplants to be incorporated in the treatment of
increasing numbers of patients, including more routine
transplant of fit patients up to their early 70s.
It has long been recognized that the immune system
plays a key role in surveillance against cancer development
and can also be modulated to produce remissions and even
cures in a number of cancer diagnoses. In the treatment of
malignant disease, allogeneic stem cell transplantation offers an aggressive immune modulation in replacing the
patient’s immune system with that of the donor. The same
minor histocompatibility differences responsible for the
problems of GVHD offer the opportunity for a “graft
versus tumor” effect, and in many patients it may be this
rather than the chemotherapy and radiation per se that
ultimately produces a cure.
Allogeneic transplantation is therefore rapidly coming of
age, and as it does so it has proved to be a more complex
and multifaceted technique than originally appreciated. In
nonmalignant diseases, the traditional need to replace a
diseased organ with a more functional one remains the
primary goal, and patient preparation and stem cell source
selection are focused on minimizing technical complications such as GVHD. Allogeneic transplantation has long
served to help patients with severe aplastic anemia and
life-threatening immunodeficiency disorders. As the technical complications decrease, allogeneic transplantation
has and will be increasingly used to treat patients at higher
risk and with more chronic blood disorders such as sickle
cell anemia and thalassemia.
In the treatment of malignant disease, allogeneic
transplantation has been particularly successful in the

treatment of chronic myelogenous leukemia where the
“graft versus leukemia” effect can be active. It is interesting that the parallel success of imatinib has significantly reduced the number of patients going to transplant, although the latter remains an important option
for patients with a poor response or relapsed disease.
Allogeneic transplantation for acute nonlymphoblastic
leukemia and lymphoproliferative disorders has shown
intermediate graft versus leukemia effects but is still an
important option for selected patients. For lymphoma
and myeloma, many patients may be better served with
an autologous transplant, although selected younger
patients or patients with more aggressive disease may do
better with an allogeneic approach. Results with acute
lymphoblastic leukemia have been disappointing, but
allogeneic transplant may salvage some patients. The
advent of reduced-intensity preparation regimens and
better treatments for GVHD are opening up allogeneic
transplantation options for the usually older patients
with myelodysplasia, and ongoing investigations should
define the role in that context.
The future of transplant offers exciting possibilities with
in vitro cellular expansion and modulation to optimize
posttransplant recovery and augment graft versus leukemia effects yet minimize GVHD. Improving supportive
therapy protocols and refinement of pretransplant patient
selection and conditioning will increase the success of
transplant. Ongoing basic and clinical study should help to
characterize the graft versus leukemia effect and better
harness its potential in future patient care.
(Continued on page 286)

284
A. Appropriate identification of potential transplant patients is essential. For nonmalignant blood diseases,
transplant for patients at high risk should proceed at the
earliest opportunity, ideally before any transfusions are
required, especially in patients with aplastic anemia. For
patients with malignant disease, disease characteristics at
presentation, particularly with respect to cytogenetic
changes, will best define candidacy for transplant and its
optimal timing. Patients are usually treated with traditional therapy to achieve a remission before transplant,
but because pretransplant therapy may affect the rate of
complications and success of the transplant itself, coordination with an experienced transplant center at diagnosis
is most helpful. Particular attention should be paid in all
potential transplant patients to appropriate selection and
preparation of transfusions, which should be leukodepleted and irradiated.
B. Transplant candidates must meet minimal criteria for
organ function, especially of the lung, heart, and kidney,
to ensure tolerance of the rigors of the transplant procedure. They must have no other complicating medical
illnesses such as HIV infection that might preclude
transplant, and they must be able to give informed consent. Age criteria will vary according to the disease and
type of transplant, and performance status will critically
modulate the ability of older patients to proceed to transplant. If all other criteria are met, psychosocial, dental,
and fertility evaluations should be completed prior to
initiating the transplant process.
C. If a patient is suitable for transplant, an appropriate
cell source must be determined and steps must be
taken for cells to be harvested. This decision initially
focuses on determining whether an autologous or
allogeneic transplant would be most suitable. The
decision to transplant and choice to use an autologous
or allogeneic source, and if the latter the best potential
donor, should be pursued in collaboration with an
experienced transplant center.
D. For patients proceeding with a potential autologous
transplantation who have suitably passed previous
screening steps, blood and marrow evaluation should
ensure the high likelihood of harvesting adequate cells
to proceed. Although marrow harvests are still occasionally used, most patients will have cells harvested
from the peripheral blood after “mobilization” with
growth factors, usually following a chemotherapy treatment. Cells are collected by apheresis and their viability and numbers are assessed for adequacy; then they
are cryopreserved until their use for the transplant.
E. For patients requiring an allogeneic transplant, potential
suitable donor cells must be matched for HLA-A, B, C,
DR, and DQ determinants. Siblings are screened first,
but if no appropriately matched sibling donor is available, searches are initiated through adult donor registries
and cord blood banks. For sibling or volunteer adult
donors, additional physical, psychological, and infectious
disease screening must precede consideration for stem
cell harvest. Cord blood cells should have been screened

F.
G.

H.

I.

for adequate numbers, viability, and lack of infections at
the time of banking. ABO compatibility, allosensitization
of potential donors by previous pregnancy or blood
transfusion, and cytomegalovirus (CMV) infectious status present potential issues with transplant that do not
represent absolute contraindications to proceeding but
may prioritize choices when several potential donors are
available.
Following allogeneic transplantation, particular attention
must be directed to the prevention, early detection, and,
if present, appropriate additional therapy for GVHD.
Following all forms of hematopoietic stem transplant,
but especially following allogeneic transplantation, the
immediate recovery period (3–6 weeks) focuses on pancytopenia with need for transfusion, aggressive treatment of life-threatening infections, and the morbidity of
preparative regimen-induced mucositis. Graft rejection
or late failure is rare, but blood counts should be closely
monitored. Even after count recovery, patients remain at
higher risk for infections for prolonged periods, especially following allogeneic transplant. Prolonged pharmacologic prophylaxis, particularly against Pneumocystis
and viral infections and, in the context of ongoing GVHD
therapy, fungal infections, is required. Vaccination against
pneumococcus and Haemophilus influenzae and revaccination with killed polio and diphtheria/tetanus vaccines
is typically given at 1 year posttransplant; because the
measles, mumps, rubella (MMR) vaccine is live, there is
concern about vaccination-induced infections, so centers
vary in their use of it. Intensity and duration of GVHD
prophylaxis or treatment will vary from patient to patient.
Appropriate follow-up is critical to success and must be
conducted at or in collaboration with an experienced
transplant center.
Posttransplant patients face many other potential longterm issues, including growth alteration in pediatric
transplant recipients, increased rates of secondary malignancies, and prolonged physical and psychological
morbidities and disabilities. Chronic GVHD may present particular challenges in treatment and morbidity or
mortality. Continued involvement of the transplant
team with patients experiencing late complications will
be critical.
If the primary disease relapses after transplant, selected
patients may benefit from additional cellular-based
therapies. In diseases with a strong potential for graft
versus leukemia effects, simple infusion of additional
donor cells (donor lymphocyte infusions) sometimes
may reinduce remission. Highly selected patients may
be candidates for repeated transplant based on disease
status and interval from the first transplant.

References
Armitage JO. Bone marrow transplantation. N Engl J Med 1994;330:827.
Blume KG, Forman SJ, Appelbaum FR, eds. Thomas’ Hematopoietic
Cell Transplantation, 3rd ed. Boston: Blackwell, 2004.

285
Patient for STEM CELL TRANSPLANTATION

A Early identification of potential transplant candidate and

coordination with transplant center
Appropriate transfusion strategy and timing of transplant

B Age, organ function, and infectious disease

screening of potential candidates
Psychosocial, dental, and fertility evaluations

C Potential transplant candidate
Determine type of transplant

Autologous transplant indicated

D Arrange for autologous

cell harvest and cryopreservation
Proceed to transplant at suitable time

Not a candidate
Explore nontransplant options

Allogeneic transplant indicated

E Evaluate for sibling, registry, or cord blood

cell sources matched for HLA-A, B, C, DR, DQ
Screen donor/donor cells for suitability
Awareness of ABO, allosensitization, CMV

F Appropriate GVHD therapy

G Immediate posttransplant support focused on

transfusion, infection, and mucositis issues
GVHD issues in allogeneic transplant

H Potential long-term posttransplant issues related
to late secondary malignancies, enduring organ
effects of preparative regimen, chronic GVHD

I If primary disease relapses, consider donor
lymphocyte infusion or repeat transplant in
highly selected patients

