COAGULATION ABNORMALITIES


A. Blood coagulation represents conversion of the soluble
plasma protein fibrinogen into an insoluble fibrillar
polymer, fibrin. It is the result of complex serial reactions involving procoagulant proteins that circulate in
plasma as inert precursors until converted sequentially
by specific chain reactions to their active forms. Factors
are numbered not by the order in which they become
activated but by the order in which they were discovered. The prothrombin time (PT) measures the extrinsic
and common pathways of coagulation, including factors
VII, X, V, II, and I. The partial thromboplastin time
(PTT) measures the intrinsic and common pathways of
coagulation, including factors XII, XI, IX, VIII, X, V, II,
and I. The thrombin time (TT) measures the time it
takes to convert fibrinogen to fibrin, the last stage of the
common pathway.
B. When confronted with a prolonged PT or PTT, first take
a careful history, including previous bleeding or bruising,
spontaneously or after surgery or trauma. A family history of bleeding and a complete list of medications being
taken (prescription or not) are essential. Confirm that
platelets are normal by count. Also inquire about history
of clotting because lupus anticoagulants can prolong PT
bleeding time. In 1990 an analysis of 862 publications on
the bleeding time concluded that the bleeding time is
not a useful test, particularly as a preoperative screening
test in a patient with negative bleeding history (see
Rodgers reference).
C. Patients with a history of bleeding disorders often
know the etiologic factors and corrective measures
taken in the past. If so, correct the situation as before
(if possible, check with the patient’s regular physician
for dosage and type of factor correction) or refer the
patient to a hematologist.
D. When the cause is unknown or when there is no history
of bleeding, first confirm the abnormality of the coagulation times, especially if there has been no previous
bleeding with trauma or major surgery. Again, a detailed
history, including medications, and a full physical
examination are essential.
E. When coagulation tests do not correct with mixing studies, it usually is because an inhibitor or anticoagulant is
present. A correction denotes a deficiency of one or
more coagulation factors. Inhibitors are either antibodies
directed to specific factors (e.g., factor VIII or factor IX
antibody) or an antiphospholipid antibody (lupuslike
antibody) directed to phospholipid. Inhibition can also
occur from a drug such as heparin or protamine, but it is
usually known when these substances are present.
246

F. An isolated prolonged PT that corrects with mixing
suggests a factor VII deficiency, and this factor can
then be measured directly. If no correction occurs on
mixing with normal plasma, there is likely an inhibitor
present, most likely a lupuslike inhibitor; however, a
specific factor antibody could also be present. Specific
assays for a lupuslike inhibitor are available.
G. An isolated prolonged PTT that corrects with mixing
suggests one or more factor deficiencies (VIII, IX, XI, or
XII). An inherited deficiency is often of a single factor,
whereas multiple-factor deficiencies are usually acquired
(e.g., liver disease). No correction suggests a lupus or
specific inhibitor. Factor VIII deficiency (classic hemophilia A) is an X-linked inherited disorder that affects
only males clinically; females are carriers. It is the most
common severe coagulation disorder. Coordinate treatment with an experienced hematologist, but emergency
replacement can be done with fresh frozen plasma
(FFP), cryoprecipitate, or factor VIII concentrates.
Von Willebrand’s disease is the most common and most
heterogeneous of heritable defects of coagulation. It
arises from a qualitative or quantitative deficiency of the
adhesive glycoprotein, von Willebrand factor (vWF),
which is required for platelet adhesion. It serves as a carrier protein for factor VIII and stabilizes factor VIII in
the plasma. vWF is an autosomal-dominant disorder
with its gene located on chromosome 12. Some of
the rare types of vWD are actually autosomal recessive.
Last, factor IX deficiency (hemophilia B) is an X-linked
disorder that is indistinguishable from factor VIII
disease clinically, but it is treated with FFP or with
factor IX concentrates.
H. A prolonged TT is often caused by small amounts of
heparin that many patients receive in the hospital;
therefore, a reptilase time (RT) may be done to exclude
heparin. Reptilase is a thrombinlike enzyme from a
particular snake venom that is not inhibited by heparin.
If both the TT and RT are prolonged, the abnormality
is from low fibrinogen or the presence of fibrinogen
degradation products (FDPs), a paraprotein, or an abnormal fibrinogen molecule, all of which can be measured directly.
I. When both the PT and PTT are prolonged, the same
reasoning can be applied as discussed for each individual
test, except that multiple factors in multiple pathways
may be deficient (inhibitor mix corrects) or may be
inhibited (inhibitor mix does not correct). Again, specific
factors can be assayed directly and potential causes can
be considered as indicated in the decision tree.

247
Patient with ABNORMAL COAGULATION TESTS

A Prolonged clotting times (PTT, PT, TT)
B History of bleeding

No or unknown
history of bleeding

spontaneously or
after surgery or trauma

C Known etiology,

factor deficiency,
or inhibitor

D Unknown

Correct
or
Refer to
hematologist

F PT
Inhibitor
mix

G PTT

etiology

E Repeat test with

equal mixture of
patient’s and “normal”
plasma

I PT 1 PTT

H TT

Inhibitor
mix

Reptilase
time

Correction

No correction

Correction

No correction

Normal

Factor
deficiency
(VII)
(most likely
inherited)

Specific or
lupus-like
inhibitor

Factor
deficiency
(VIII, IX, XI, XII)
(most likely
inherited
single-factor
deficiency)

Specific or
lupuslike
inhibitor

Heparin

References
Ey FS, Goodnight SH. Bleeding disorders in cancer. Semin Oncol
1990;17:187.
Jandl JH. Disorders of coagulation. In Blood: Textbook of Hematology,
2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1996.
Levine M, Hirsh J. The diagnosis and treatment of thrombosis in the
cancer patient. Semin Oncol 1990;17:160.
Patterson WP. Coagulation and cancer: an overview. Semin Oncol
1990;17:137.

Prolonged

FDP
Fibrinogen
Paraprotein
assay
Dysfibrinogen

Inhibitor
mix

Correction

No correction

Factor
deficiency
(single,
inherited
factor
deficiency
of common
pathway [II, V,
X] or multiple
acquired
deficiencies
[liver disease,
DIC, vitamin
K deficiency])

Inhibitor
(most likely
lupuslike)

Patterson WP, Caldwell CW, Doll DC. Hyperviscosity syndromes and
coagulopathies. Semin Oncol 1990;17:210.
Patterson WP, Ringenberg QS. The pathophysiology of thrombosis in
cancer. Semin Oncol 1990;17:140.
Rapaport S. Preoperative hemostatic evaluation: which tests, if any?
Blood 1983;61:229.
Rodgers RP. Bleeding time tables. A tabular summary of pertinent
literature. Semin Thromb Hemost 1990;16:21–138.
Schaffer AI. The hypercoagulable states. Ann Intern Med 1985;102:814.

