Coma is defined as a “sleeplike unresponsiveness without evidence of awareness of the self or the environment, a state from which patients cannot be aroused.” Patients in coma do not show any meaningful responsiveness to their environment but may have variably intact brainstem reflexes. To be considered in coma, the patient may exhibit reflex posturing in response to noxious stimuli but cannot withdraw to pain or otherwise show signs of awareness of external or internal stimuli. The responsibilities of the physician include stabilization of the patient's vital functions and institution of the initial steps in evaluation and management.
Consciousness is predicated on both arousal and awareness and is mediated by the ascending reticular activating system, which originates in the rostral brainstem and then projects into both cerebral hemispheres. Thus, to produce coma, a cerebral process must either affect the rostral brainstem primarily, both cerebral hemispheres concomitantly, or all of the above. Primary brainstem processes include vascular events (e.g., ischemic stroke, hemorrhage), drug intoxication, and compression from a supratentorial or infratentorial mass lesion. Diffuse hemispheric processes include hypoxic-ischemic injuries (e.g., from cardiac arrest), drug intoxication, seizures, infection (e.g., meningoencephalitis), and metabolic disorders (e.g., hypoglycemia, hyponatremia, renal failure, liver failure).
A. The foremost clinical goal in the management of a patient presenting in coma is the ABCs of basic life support. IV access should be obtained promptly, as should nasogastric and urinary catheters. Endotracheal intubation is usually necessary, secondary to poor airway protection or ineffective respiratory efforts. Blood should be sent for CBC, extended chemistries, ammonia level, ABGs, liver function studies, and toxicology screen (including urine). Thiamine (100 mg IV) and glucose (1 amp D50 IV) should be administered early. Naloxone (0.4-2.0 mg IV) administration should be considered in cases of suspected narcotic overdose.
B. A rapid medical and neurologic examination should be performed, preferably prior to intubation, because sedating and/or paralytic medications are often administered for intubation. Specific attention should be paid to the cranial nerves and to movements in the extremities to noxious stimulation. The Glasgow Coma Scale (Table 1) provides a quick, systematic way to assess brain dysfunction in patients who are comatose. It most often is used in traumatic coma. The skull should be palpated for hematomas, and one should look for Battle's sign (ecchymosis over the mastoid) or “raccoon eyes” (ecchymosis around the eyes), either of which suggest a basal skull fracture. Other signs include hemotympanum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage from the nose or ears. The cervical spine should be immobilized, especially in cases of trauma or if the patient's loss of consciousness was unwitnessed.
C. Neuroimaging should be performed in all patients who are comatose to rule out a structural lesion. Initially, CT is preferable to MRI because of its ability to detect acute blood and bone abnormalities, but results can be normal in the early stages of stroke, meningitis, or following cardiac arrest. MRI is superior to CT for the detection of acute cerebral infarction or early signs of encephalitis. CT of the C-spine is performed to evaluate for stability in the acute setting, but MRI may also be required to assess for ligamentous injury.
D. A nonfocal examination should raise suspicion of a toxic or metabolic etiology. Dysfunction in virtually any organ system may lead to confusional states and coma. Look for systemic signs of renal or liver insufficiency/failure. Consider drug ingestion or toxin exposure. In most cases, metabolic dysfunction does not cause nonreactive pupils or focal neurologic signs. However, atropine-like substances and glutethimide can abolish pupillary reflexes, and opiate overdose may cause the pupils to be so constricted that a very bright light and a magnifying glass may be needed to detect any reactivity. Toxic-metabolic insults also may result in seizures and lateralizing neurologic signs that may wax and wane or even shift from side to side. Extensor plantar responses also may be seen. However, metabolic causes of coma (especially intoxication) may obscure signs of an underlying focal lesion. Therefore, neuroimaging should still be performed.
E. If a focal lesion is responsible for coma, it is useful to localize the lesion to a supratentorial or infratentorial location. The examination should emphasize the following: eye opening to loud auditory or vigorous physical stimulation, blinking to visual threat, pupillary response to bright light (size, symmetry, reactivity), eye movement abnormalities (including the oculocephalic reflex or “doll's eyes” and the oculovestibular reflex or "cold calorics"), corneal reflex, gag reflex, respiratory pattern (e.g., Cheyne-Stokes, central neurogenic hyperventilation, ataxic and apneustic breathing), extremity movements to noxious stimulation (e.g., symmetric vs. asymmetric responses, decorticate/decerebrate posturing), deep tendon reflexes, and the Babinski reflex. A complete discussion of the abnormalities observed with lesions in different brain areas is beyond the scope of this chapter. The key is to carefully and systematically perform and document the neurologic examination so that clinical stability or progression can be appreciated by the medical team.
F. Signs of meningismus include nuchal rigidity and Kernig's and Brudzinski's signs. Such findings may accompany either a nonfocal or focal examination. Nonfocal examinations may reflect subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) or meningoencephalitis. Focal lesions may induce meningismus through direct meningeal irritation (e.g., parenchymal hemorrhage with rupture into the subarachnoid space) or through increased intracranial pressure, which may lead to herniation. After obtaining neuroimaging to rule out a mass lesion, a lumbar puncture should be performed, looking for evidence of blood, xanthochromia, or infection. Approximately 6% of SAHs are diagnosed by lumbar puncture after a falsely negative CT scan. Furthermore, signs of meningismus may be absent in deep coma, so consider performing a lumbar puncture if the history suggests an infectious etiology or if there is no alternative explanation for the patient's state.
G. Prolonged or sustained seizure activity (i.e., status epilepticus) may lead to impaired consciousness and coma. Patients may be in status epilepticus without overt signs of seizures (i.e., nonconvulsive status epilepticus). Seizures also may reflect an underlying process that itself leads to coma. Observe patients carefully for evidence of seizure activity, especially the eyes, which may be deviated to one side or moving rhythmically. Focal seizures suggest a focal lesion, and generalized seizures or myoclonus suggest a toxic-metabolic insult, although these rules are not absolute. Laboratory studies should include anticonvulsant levels as well as metabolic parameters. An EEG may be useful not only to assess seizure activity but also to look for abnormalities compatible with metabolic abnormalities (e.g., rhythmic discharges in hepatic encephalopathy) or focal lesions (i.e., focal slowing).

