CONJUNCTIVITIS

A. Chronic conjunctivitis lasting !4 weeks has a large
differential, and therefore patients with chronic conjunctivitis should be referred to an ophthalmologist.
B. The acute mucopurulent discharge of bacterial conjunctivitis is typically yellowish-white, thick, and creamy.
This is in contrast to the thin, grayish-white, watery, or
stringy mucus seen in nonbacterial conjunctivitis.
C. Concerning history includes contact lens wear, recent
eye surgery or any history of glaucoma surgery, or any
history or symptoms of sexually transmitted disease.
These patients should be referred immediately to ophthalmology for further evaluation.
D. If there is no prior or concerning history, the discharge
should be cleaned from the eye with frequent flushing
using artificial tears and warm compresses to the lids.
Antibacterial drops should be given QID for 1 week,
with polymyxin-trimethoprim or a fourth-generation
fluoroquinolone.
E. Viral conjunctivitis is typically associated with an upper
respiratory tract infection (URI) and tender swollen preauricular nodes. Because viral conjunctivitis is extremely
contagious when the discharge is present, meticulous
hygiene should be maintained with frequent handwashing, avoidance of touching the eyes, and avoidance

472

of sharing towels or linens. Cool compresses and artificial
tears can provide symptomatic relief.
F. If conjunctivitis is associated with vesicles of the periocular skin, an ophthalmologist should be consulted to evaluate for more extensive herpetic ocular involvement.
G. Allergic conjunctivitis is typically bilateral, with significant itching and watery discharge. Systemic antihistamines and allergen exposure control are helpful. Cool
compresses and artificial tears may be sufficient for
mild symptoms. Topical antihistamine/vasoconstrictor
drops QID (over the counter) can be used for a few
weeks, but chronic use may cause rebound hyperemia
and tachyphylaxis. Alternatively, topical antihistamine/
vasoconstrictor/mast cell stabilizer drops QD–bid can
be prescribed for use as needed.
References
Bradford CA, ed. Basic Ophthalmology, 8th ed. San Francisco: American
Academy of Ophthalmology, 2004.
Kaiser PA, Friedman NJ, Pineda R II. The Massachusetts Eye and Ear
Infirmary Illustrated Manual of Ophthalmology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia:
Saunders, 2003.
Trobe JD. The Physician’s Guide to Eye Care, 3rd ed. San Francisco:
American Academy of Ophthalmology, 2006.

473
Patient with CONJUNCTIVITIS

A Chronic

Acute

B Watery mucous

B Mucopurulent
discharge

discharge

Bacterial

Associated
with URI

E Viral
C Concerning history

D No ocular
history

Associated with
periocular vesicles

F Herpetic

Associated with
significant itching

G Allergic

