CONSTIPATION


A. In Western societies, adults average three bowel movements per week. There is significant variation depending on sex, age, diet, culture, and geographic location.
History should be directed at defining the characteristics, frequency, and severity of complaints. New onset of
an altered bowel pattern in an older individual who has
not undergone recent colorectal cancer screening should
suggest mechanical colonic obstruction until proved
otherwise. Whenever possible, colonoscopy should be
considered as the initial diagnostic study in this situation, whether or not there are other concerning symptoms such as bleeding, pain, or weight loss. Those with
more chronic symptoms and younger patients are
more likely to have irritable bowel syndrome (IBS),
colorectal motility disorders, Hirschsprung’s disease, or
medication-related constipation. The latter issue is probably underappreciated, but the use of opiates, calcium
channel blockers, “antispasmodics,” other anticholinergic drugs, and iron supplements should be considered.
Systemic diseases, including diabetes mellitus, progressive systemic sclerosis, Parkinson’s disease, and thyroid
disease, should be considered. Physical examination
should include digital rectal examination to assess for
anorectal diseases, including fissures and thrombosed
hemorrhoids, masses, fecal impaction, and possibly
sphincteric abnormalities. If not performed recently,
hemoglobin, serum electrolytes, calcium, magnesia, and
thyroid-stimulating hormone levels should be obtained.
Simple dietary measures such as the addition of fluid
and fiber and elimination of potentially offending agents
are usually recommended initially; however, persistent

208

symptoms should warrant the exclusion of significant
colorectal pathology.
B. In patients 50 years of age and older, colonoscopy
can be justified based on current colorectal cancer
screening recommendations. In younger patients with
a family history of colorectal cancer or unexplained
iron-deficiency anemia, colonoscopy should also be
considered. Otherwise, barium enema and flexible
sigmoidoscopy should be adequate to evaluate for
structural colorectal lesions. Barium enema may also
be useful in children and adolescents, in whom
Hirschsprung’s disease is more common. Although
important to exclude obstructing processes in the appropriate setting, these studies do not commonly define the source of the problem.
C. The finding of an obstructing colorectal mass, usually
adenocarcinoma, generally requires surgical resection.
In selected cases where there is obstruction in the setting of widely metastatic disease, palliation with laser
photocoagulation or colonic stent placement may be
effective alternatives. Stents may also be placed when
there is near-complete colonic obstruction to allow for
colonic decompression and better colonic preparation
prior to elective surgery.
D. Anorectal disorders, including fissures, thrombosed
hemorrhoids, and perirectal abscesses, may contribute
to constipation by causing fecal avoidance because of
pain. Conservative measures including stool bulking
agents, softeners, sitz baths, and local nitrates or calcium channel blockers are preferred unless symptoms
persist or an abscess develops, requiring surgery.
(Continued on page 210)

209
Patient with CONSTIPATION

A History

Physical examination

Laboratory
tests

Heme-positive stool
or
Rectal bleeding

B

Polyp

C Obstructing
mass

Specific
Therapy

Barium Enema/Flexible
Sigmoidoscopy
or
Colonoscopy

D Anorectal
disorder

Specific
Therapy

Normal

Dilated colon

Cont’d on p 211

Cont’d on p 211

210
E. In patients with complaints of constipation and studies
that exclude obstructing lesions, a radiopaque marker
colonic transit study confirms the presence of a motility problem and may help define the cause. Commercially available capsules contain 24 tiny radiopaque
pellets that can be seen on standard radiographs.
A simplified study involves obtaining x-ray films on
day 3 following ingestion and 2 days later if markers
are seen in the colon on the first study. Often patients
misinterpret symptoms of hard stool consistency or
problems with fecal evacuation as constipation, and
transit studies may provide objective data to support
or refute their perception. The finding that all markers are passed by the time of the first radiograph usually suggests that the problem is one of perception
rather than delay in fecal transit. When most markers
persist in the rectum and rectosigmoid region, the
possibility of functional anorectal motility disturbance
should be further investigated. Those found to have
persistence of radiopaque markers throughout the
colon are more likely to have slow transit constipation
or a diffuse colonic motility disturbance, which may
respond to saline laxatives, prokinetic agents, and fiber
supplementation.
F. A large number of patients complaining of constipation will be found to have normal colonic transit as
measured by radiopaque marker studies. In some the
feeling of constipation may reflect their expectations
relative to cultural norms; most probably have a variant of IBS. Empirical treatment generally begins with
taking bulking agents, eating a high-fiber diet, and
increasing fluid intake. Some patients may require
osmotic agents, saline laxatives, and prokinetics agents
such as tegaserod. Stimulant cathartics may also be
used periodically, although there is anecdotal (and
unproven) concern regarding the development of colonic hypomotility when used frequently.
G. The finding of colonic dilation on barium enema suggests the possibility of neurologic impairment of the
colon (e.g., Hirschsprung’s disease), an anorectal motility disorder, or colonic pseudoobstruction. Rectal biopsy in children is useful in diagnosing Hirschsprung’s
disease. The finding of melenosis coli on colonoscopy is
diagnostic of chronic use of anthraquinone-containing
laxatives (e.g., cascara or senna).
H. Anorectal motility studies using catheters that measure
anal sphincter pressures and studies measuring the

expulsion of water-filled balloons of varying size can be
helpful in assessing anorectal physiology. In addition,
measurement of nerve conduction velocity of the puborectalis muscle can help to determine the appropriateness of muscular and neurogenic response. Together these studies can define the presence or absence
of pelvic relaxation disorders and a number of other
motility disturbances that may contribute to constipation. Specific treatment depends on the specific disorder that is discovered but usually involves some combination of bulking agents, prokinetic drugs, and
biofeedback therapy aimed at retraining and restoring
normal anorectal activity.
I. When specific anatomic definition of the anorectal
abnormality is required, defecography is performed
by the transrectal instillation of thickened barium
pastes or other viscous radiopaque materials. Lateral
fluoroscopic views of the distal colon, including the
rectosigmoid junction, are obtained during active defecation to determine whether there is normal puborectalis activity leading to straightening of the anorectal angle. This study can help to define abnormalities
in perineal descent, rectoceles, and rectal prolapse.
Those with chronic colonic dilation, normal anatomic
studies and colonic biopsies, and anorectal motility
studies are said to have chronic idiopathic colonic
pseudoobstruction. Although treatable by ileostomy,
this is frequently a highly morbid procedure in these
patients.

References
Brandt L, Prather C, Quigley E, et al. An evidence-based approach to
the management of chronic constipation in North America. Am J
Gastroenterol 2005;100:S1.
Diamant N, Kamm M, Wald A, Whitehead W. AGA technical review on
anorectal testing techniques. Gastroenterology 1999;116:735.
Higgins P, Johanson J. Epidemiology of constipation in North America: a
systematic review. Am J Gastroenterol 2004;99:750.
Muller-Lissner S, Kamm M, Scarpignato C, Wald A. Myths and misconceptions about chronic constipation. Am J Gastroenterol 2005;
100:232.
Rao S, Ozturk R, Laine L. Clinical utility of diagnostic tests for constipation in adults: a systematic review. Am J Gastroenterol 2005;
100:1605.
Stewart W, Liberman J, Sandler R, et al. Epidemiology of constipation
(EPOC) study in the United States: relation of clinical subtypes to
sociodemographic features. Am J Gastroenterol 1999;94:3530.
Wald A. Is chronic use of stimulant laxatives harmful to the colon? J Clin
Gastroenterol 2003;36:386.

211
Patient with CONSTIPATION
(Cont’d from p 209)

G Dilated colon

Normal

E

F Normal

Radiopaque
Marker
Transit Study

Slow transit
constipation

Normal

Anorectal
motility
disorder

IBS

or
Psychological
disorder

Rectal
Biopsy

H

Specific
Therapy

Empiric
Therapy

I

Anorectal
Motility
Study

Abnormal

Defecography

Specific
Therapy

Idiopathic colonic
pseudo-obstruction

Anorectal
motility
disorder
Specific
Therapy

Hirschsprung’s
disease
Specific
Therapy

Normal

Normal

Specific
Therapy

Melanosis
coli

