CONTRACEPTIVE CHOICES

The decision to conceive or not to conceive is a complicated one, dependent on multiple factors. It also is one in
which many patients request physician participation. To
facilitate this process, the physician must be well versed
in biologic factors that may influence this decision and
must be sensitive to patient concerns. Biologic factors that
affect contraceptive choice include age, tobacco use, history of pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), and history of
cardiovascular disease. Important patient issues that must
be clarified include plans for future fertility, current sexual
lifestyle, impact of unplanned pregnancy, history of compliance, and role of partner in birth spacing. Patients often have questions about efficacy (Table 1), safety, cost,
and noncontraceptive benefits and the need to access the
health care system to obtain or continue use of a specific
birth control method (BCM). By applying active listening
Table 1. Contraceptive Effectiveness in First Year
in the United States*
Effectiveness
BCM

Theoretical (%)†

Typical (%)‡

Vasectomy
BLTL
Norplant
Depo Provera
OCs
Combined
Mini-pill
IUD
Cu-T 380A
Progestasert
Condom
Diaphragm
Cervical cap
Sponge
Parous patient
Multiparous patient
Spermicides
Fertility awareness methods
Calendar
With BBT, postovulation
coitus only
Lactation
Breast feeding on demand with
amenorrhea, first 6 months
postpartum
Chance


*Based on data in Hatcher et al, Trussel et al (1987), and Trussel
et al (1990).
†Theoretical effectiveness attempts to predict the percent of
contraceptive failures expected among couples using the BCM
perfectly, consistently, and correctly for an entire year.
‡Typical effectiveness attempts to predict the percent of contraceptive
failures expected among typical couples using the BCM for an entire year.

610

skills to the patient-physician interaction, the physician can
help the patient make an informed choice.
A. Vasectomy is simple, inexpensive, and safe but does not
confer immediate sterility. Sperm usually are not present after 25 ejaculations, but this can be confirmed only
by microscopic examination of the semen. Although
antibody formation to sperm has been noted after vasectomy, clinically adverse implications have not been
fully elucidated. Bilateral tubal ligation (BLTL) is the
most common BCM in the world. It is an outpatient
procedure with a lower mortality rate than childbirth
(3:100,000 versus 14:100,000). If BLTL fails, the risk of
ectopic pregnancy is increased. Vasectomy and BLTL
may be reversed by microsurgical techniques. The success of reversals is inversely related to the amount of
tissue originally damaged. Patients must be counseled
that these are permanent BCMs and that their potential reversibility does not guarantee fertility.
B. Combination oral contraceptives (OCs) are second only
to BLTL as the most common BCM in the world today.
OCs were the first BCM to separate contraceptive use
from sexual activity. They contain either estrogen and
progesterone in fixed or variable combination or progesterone alone, the “mini-pill.” The latter contains lowdose progesterone and is an option in women for whom
estrogen is contraindicated (e.g., older women with cardiovascular risk factors) or in women who are lactating.
Its efficacyis less than that for the combination OCs. In
the former, the estrogen and progesterone hormone
combination may be fixed (monophasic) or variable
(phasic). In phasic preparations, the pills within a pack
contain variable doses of the progestin and occasionally
of the estrogen to decrease the overall hormonal doses
while maintaining contraceptive effects and decreasing
metabolic side effects.
OCs act by preventing ovulation. If ovulation should
occur, implantation is prevented by changes in the
cervical mucus and endometrium.
Patients should be instructed to start the pack of pills
at the onset of the menses or on the first Sunday after
the start of menstruation. Contraceptive efficacy requires
about 2–4 weeks to develop. During these initial first few
weeks another BCM should also be used. In a 28-day
pack, 21 pills contain active hormone preparation and
7 are placebo pills that serve to facilitate daily pill taking.
Some packs containing 21 pills and no placebos are available in some brands. If a pill is missed, the woman
should take one pill every 12 hours until all the forgotten
pills have been taken. A back-up BCM is advised for
(Continued on page 611)

611
Patient for CONTRACEPTION

A Permanent

Vasectomy

BLTL

Reversible

Precoital

H Postcoital
Cont’d on p 615

D IUD

B Hormonal

Cont’d on p 613
Combination
OC

NuvaRing

E Barrier methods:
Cont’d on p 613

Nontechnologic
methods
Cont’d on p 615

Option if:
Patient
!35 years
old
Patient
nonsmoker
Patient
willing to
attend to
daily BCM
Progestin-only
Contraceptives

Cont’d on p 613

the remainder of the month. If three or more pills are
missed repeatedly, another BCM should be considered.
In the case of the mini-pill, even a 3-hour delay in pill
taking may result in compromised antifertility activity;
therefore a back-up BCM is recommended for 48 hours
for such a delay. Patients should be counseled that OCs
only prevent pregnancy, not sexually transmitted diseases. Condoms are still needed to prevent sexually
transmitted diseases while one is taking OC.
Absolute contraindications to OC use include history
of thrombophlebitis or thromboembolic events, cigarette smoking (1 pack/day or more), and age "35 years;
hypertension; history of estrogen-dependent malignancy, such as breast or endometrial cancer; undiagnosed abnormal vaginal bleeding; and impaired liver
function with history of cholestatic jaundice with prior
pill use or with pregnancy or history of hepatic adenomas or carcinomas. Relative contraindications to OC
use: smoker (1 pack/day or more) and history of migraines, severe headaches, seizures, severe depression,
hyperlipidemia, ovarian dysfunction, gallbladder disease, diabetes mellitus, gestational diabetes, melanoma,
obesity (550% overweight), or lactation.
Estrogen-related side effects include nausea, breast
tenderness, cyclic weight gain, thrombophlebitis and

thromboembolic events particularly in smokers, leukorrhea, cervical ectopy, headaches, hypertension, and
benign or malignant hepatic neoplasias. Progesteronerelated side effects include weight gain, depression,
fatigue, decreased libido, acne, carbohydrate intolerance, and hyperlipidemia. OCs should be prescribed
after a thorough history and physical examination have
been performed. Once the patient is placed on OC
therapy, close follow-up is necessary.
Hormonal contraception is also available as a vaginal ring (NuvaRing). This ring is inserted into the
vagina and is removed after 3 weeks, allowing for
menses to occur, before it is replaced again after one
week. The ring contains ethinyl estradiol and etonogestrel. The principle advantage is that the patient
does not need to remember to take daily pills, therefore increasing compliance.
With all the oral contraceptive methods and NuvaRing, the option exists to avoid menses by taking pills
continuously and omitting the 1 week off. Some preparations are marketed as such (Seasonale), but any preparation can be modified to prevent menses. It is recommended that if patients choose the continuous method
of oral contraception, menses should be allowed to occur quarterly, by omitting pills (or the ring) for 1 week.

612
C. Long-acting progestin-only contraceptives include
Depo Provera. Norplant, the implantable progestin
device, is no longer commonly used in this country
since questions regarding its efficacy were raised (and
subsequently dismissed) in 2000. The advantage of
these progestin-only methods is that the estrogenassociated thromboembolic complications are avoided.
Women most at risk for estrogen-related side effects
are 35 years old or older, smokers, hypertensive patients, and those with a history of hypercoagulability.
Progesterone-related side effects include increased
low-density lipoprotein and decreased high-density lipoprotein with increased carbohydrate intolerance,
possibly leading to diabetes. These methods act by inhibiting ovulation, maintaining thick cervical mucus
inhospitable to sperm, and producing thin atrophic
endometrium subject to premature luteolysis. Depo
Provera, “the shot,” consists of 150 mg of medroxyprogesterone given intramuscularly every 3 months. Although women often experience irregular vaginal
bleeding in the first 12 months, the most common side
effect after the first year is amenorrhea.
D. Intrauterine devices (IUDs) have a long history, but
currently only two are available in the United States:
Cu-T 380A and Mirena (a levonorgestrel-eluting IUD),
with the former being more widely used. Cu-T 380A is
FDA approved for 10-year use; however, Progestasert
must be replaced every 5 years. IUDs are thought to act
by inhibiting fertilization and implantation through local foreign body inflammation and because of the copper or progesterone effect of producing an atrophic
endometrium. IUDs are contraindicated in patients
with a known history of PID or ectopic pregnancy. They
are inserted at the time of a woman’s menses. Side effects for the copper IUD include menorrhagia, which
may result in anemia; dysmenorrhea; and uterine perforation secondary to a wandering IUD. The Mirena
IUD reduces menstrual bleeding and is ideal for

patients who have heavy vaginal bleeding or for perimenopausal women who are experiencing dysfunctional uterine bleeding. Instruct the woman to ascertain
IUD placement by checking for the IUD string.
E. Barrier methods require active patient participation.
The diaphragm and cervical cap have been available
for about 100 years and require fitting by a health care
practitioner. Diaphragm use requires spermicide application before each episode of intercourse. It can be
inserted up to 2 hours before intercourse and must
remain in place 6–8 hours after coitus. Refitting must
take place after pregnancy, pelvic surgery, or weight
change of 10 pounds or more. In the United States, the
Prentif cap is the only cervical cap available. It is inserted no less than half an hour before intercourse
with a small amount of spermicide within the dome
and can remain in place for 72 hours. A 24-hour limit
is recommended to decrease cervical irritation and risk
of toxic shock syndrome (TSS). Repeated spermicide
applications are not required. The cervical cap cannot
be used during menses. The cervical sponge is no longer available in the United States but is available
abroad. It does not require health practitioner fitting
and contains 1 gram of nonoxynol-9. It is available
without a prescription and can be used continuously
for 24 hours after moistening with tap water. All the
aforementioned methods carry the risk of TSS. Spermicides can be used alone, although their efficacy is
greatest when used in combination with condoms.
Noncontraceptive benefits of nonoxynol-9 include prevention of STDs and PID. Condoms are the only male
form of contraception. Problems with efficacy are associated with improper use (i.e., not leaving a 1/2-inch
reservoir at the tip or not withdrawing carefully immediately after coitus). The Reality female condom
has been developed and is commercially available.
Recent studies in male contraception confirm the contraceptive efficacy of hormone-induced oligospermia.
(Continued on page 614)

613
Patient for CONTRACEPTION
(Cont’d from p 611)

Reversible

Precoital

D IUD

Hormonal
Progestin-only
Contraceptives

Option if:
Patient
at risk for
estrogen
side effects

Progestin-only
Mini-Pill

Option if:
Patient willing
to attend daily
BCM

C

E Barrier methods

Option if:
Patient has no
history of:
Diaphragm
Multiple partners
Cervical cap
PID
Spermicides
Ectopic pregnancy
Nulliparity
Immunosuppression
(HIV, leukemia,
immunosuppressive
drugs)
Option if:
Patient willing
to attend to
Long-Acting:
BCM at time
Depo-Provera
of intercourse
Norplant (rarely
used in the
United States)

Condom

Nontechnologic
methods

Cont’d on p 615

Option if
patient is:
Male
Allergic to:
nonoxynol-9
With multiple
partners

