CORNEAL ABRASION


Corneal abrasions typically heal rapidly (within 1–2 days)
depending on the extent of injury and the patient’s age
and health. The most important management issues are to
exclude more severe injury and to allow healing without
infection. Topical anesthetics should never be prescribed
for pain control because chronic use is toxic to the corneal
epithelium.
A. If the abrasion is associated with a significant mechanism of injury (e.g., high-velocity foreign body), contact
with vegetable matter such as a bush or tree, or associated contact lens wear, the patient should be referred to
an ophthalmologist for examination because these situations have potential for more serious injury or more
virulent or atypical pathogens.
B. On penlight examination, a corneal abrasion may show
a normal corneal light reflection or an isolated irregular corneal light reflection in the area of the abrasion.
Fluorescein staining and examination under cobalt
blue light will outline the area of denuded epithelium
as a yellowish-green stain.
C. Patients with recurrent erosion syndrome report a
history of recurrent episodes of awakening with symptoms of a corneal abrasion. The examination is often
normal because the abrasion has often healed by the
time the patient is seen. Patients should use aggressive
lubrication with artificial tears QID and erythromycin
or another bland ointment QHS for 1 month. An ophthalmology referral should be pursued if the patient is
still symptomatic.
D. Multiple linear streaks of fluorescein staining indicate
a foreign body embedded in the upper lid until proved
otherwise. After everting the upper lid to remove the
foreign body, the abrasion is treated as indicated for
small abrasions (see section E). The upper lid also
should be everted if the patient reports a history of a
foreign body in the eye.

470

E. Small abrasions are treated with ophthalmic ointment
tid–qid, such as erythromycin, polymyxin/bacitracin, or
bacitracin ointment. Antibiotic ointments with steroids
are contraindicated. Patients are seen within 1–2 days
to ensure complete resolution of the abrasion without
complication.
F. Large abrasions are treated with antibiotic ointments
as noted in section E. In addition, pressure patching
for 24 hours may decrease pain and aid in healing. A
folded eye pad is placed over the closed lid and covered with a second eye pad. Tape is applied diagonally
across the forehead to the patient’s cheekbone to
tightly secure the pad and prevent blinking. An eye
patch should never be applied if there is recent history
of contact lens wear, potential vegetable matter, or a
potential infection. Oral analgesics can be prescribed
as needed for 1 day. Topical anesthetics should never
be prescribed. Patients should be seen within 24 hours
to ensure healing is progressing without infection, or
they should be referred to an ophthalmologist.
G. The branching pattern of a corneal dendrite indicates
herpetic eye disease. The patient should be referred
to an ophthalmologist for further evaluation and
management.
H. Immediate ophthalmology referral should be sought
for concerning findings such as a corneal opacity, embedded foreign body, a shallow anterior chamber, or an
irregular pupil. These signs indicate significant injury
or potential infection.
References
Bradford CA, ed. Basic Ophthalmology, 8th ed. San Francisco: American
Academy of Ophthalmology, 2004.
Kaiser PA, Friedman NJ, Pineda R II. The Massachusetts Eye and Ear
Infirmary Illustrated Manual of Ophthalmology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia:
Saunders, 2003.
Trobe JD. The Physician’s Guide to Eye Care, 3rd ed. San Francisco:
American Academy of Ophthalmology, 2006.

471
Patient with CORNEAL ABRASION

A Concerning history

Benign history

Penlight examination

B Minimal findings

H Concerning history

Fluorescein staining

Multiple vertical
streaks

No staining

Focal area
of staining

G Dendrite

D Foreign body

Isolated event

Observation

History of recurrent
symptoms

C Recurrent erosion
syndrome

E Small abrasion

F Large abrasion

