CUSHING’S SYNDROME


Cushing’s syndrome is characterized by hypercortisolemia that can be adrenal in origin or can result from a
pituitary adenoma secreting adrenocorticotropin. The
clinical features are diverse and are related to the severity of the hypercortisolemia; no symptom or sign is specific. The most common presenting feature is obesity of
the face, neck, and abdomen that spares the extremities.
Facial fat deposition can result in a “moon” face exacerbated by deposition of fat in the supraclavicular fat
pads, which makes the neck appear shortened. These
patients develop skin thinning, atrophy, and easy bruising. Striae typical of Cushing’s syndrome are typically
purple in color, wide, and multiple, factors that help distinguish them from stretch marks associated with obesity.
Women with Cushing’s disease may have signs of hyperandrogenism such as hirsutism. Proximal myopathy (usually
described as difficulty rising from a seated position),
psychiatric
change
(emotional
lability,
depression, and mild paranoia are common), and hypertension are often at present. Other features associated
with longer-standing or more severe hypercortisolemia
include glucose intolerance, glaucoma, and osteopenia.
A. The first step in evaluating whether a patient may
have Cushing’s syndrome is to elucidate any history of
exposure to corticosteroids, including potent inhaled,
injected, or topical steroids, or medroxyprogesterone
acetate (a progestin with intrinsic steroid activity). Factitious Cushing’s syndrome accounts for !1% of all
cases and is suggested by erratic and inconsistent results. In such cases, synthetic glucocorticoids can be
assayed directly in the urine.
B. To establish hypercortisolemia, at least two 24-hour
urine samples for free cortisol should be obtained.
Patients whose levels are greater than three times
higher than the upper reference range can be assumed to have Cushing’s syndrome. Patients with
equivocal values should be retested after a few weeks
or evaluated with further testing according to the
clinical suspicion.
C. An overnight dexamethasone suppression test is also
used as a screening test to diagnose hypercortisolemia.
In this test, an 8-am serum cortisol level is drawn after
a 1-mg dexamethasone dose at 11 pm–midnight. The
sensitivity and specificity of the test for Cushing’s syndrome varies widely depending on the threshold level

154

chosen. Most normal patients should suppress their
endogenous cortisol level to !2 "g/dl. Using a level of
6.3 "g/dl, the test has a sensitivity and a specificity of
91%. For a level of 1.2 "g/dl, the corresponding values
were 100% and 41%.
A screening strategy that uses three consecutive
late-evening salivary cortisols and may ultimately replace these aforementioned tests can be performed with
minimal instruction by a patient who is ambulatory.
Reference ranges are laboratory specific. The sensitivity
may be as high as 100% and the specificity may be as
high as 96% among patients with Cushing’s syndrome.
D. Some conditions, such as severe obesity, severe depression, or chronic alcoholism, are associated with
elevated cortisol levels, a circumstance labeled
“pseudo-Cushing’s.” Among patients in whom a diagnosis of pseudo-Cushing’s is suspected, a corticotropinreleasing hormone (CRH)–dexamethasone test can
be preformed. This test capitalizes on the finding
that the pituitary is less responsive to CRH among
patients who are depressed than among patients with
Cushing’s disease or syndrome after dexamethasone
suppression. Ovine CRH is usually infused 2 hours
after the last dose of a series of 8 doses of 0.5 mg
dexamethasone given every 6 hours. Serum cortisol is
measured at 0, 15, and 30 minutes. In one series, all
patients with a level !1.4 "g/dl in the 15-minute
sample had pseudo-Cushing’s; all other patients responded with higher cortisol levels.
Once the diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome is secure,
a source for the hypercortisolemia should be sought.
Determining whether Cushing’s syndrome is adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) dependent or adrenal in
origin requires accurate measurement of ACTH levels.
It is possible to expedite the evaluation process by measuring ACTH and cortisol levels on the morning following a dexamethasone-suppression test or on completion
of one or more collections for urinary-free cortisol.
E. Cortisol secretion can be deemed ACTH independent if
the ACTH is !5 pg/ml when the cortisol level is !15
"g/dl. Under the same circumstances, the syndrome is
very likely to be ACTH dependent (Cushing’s disease) if
the ACTH level is #15 pg/ml when the cortisol is $15
"g/dl; ACTH levels of between 5 and 15 pg/ml are less
specific but usually indicate ACTH dependency. Patients with equivocal values should be reinvestigated.
(Continued on page 156)

155
Patient with Suspected CUSHING’S SYNDROME

A History

B 24-hr urinary
cortisol

C D Overnight

dexamethasonesuppression test

Cushing’s syndrome
established
Measure
plasma
ACTH
Cont’d on p 157

Midnight
salivary
cortisol

156
F. Patients with ACTH-independent hypercortisolemia
should undergo thin-slice CT of the adrenal glands
to identify the responsible adenoma, carcinoma, or
nodules.
G. Patients with ACTH-dependent hypercortisolemia
should undergo further testing to discriminate between
Cushing’s disease related to a pituitary adenoma and that
related to ectopic ACTH secretion. Tumors recognized
to secrete ACTH include small cell cancer of the lung
and bronchial and thymic carcinoids. Clinicians should
resist the temptation to image the pituitary because 10%
of the population have a structurally abnormal pituitary.
Patients should instead undergo a high-dose dexamethasone-suppression test, where 2 mg of dexamethasone is
given every 6 hours for 2 days. This test capitalizes on the
fact that ACTH-pituitary adenomas retain some feedback responsiveness and often suppress their ACTH
production when ambient glucocorticoid levels are high.
Cortisol levels are reduced by #90% among 70% of
those with Cushing’s disease. In the same study, by contradistinction, no patients with ectopically derived ACTH
suppressed their cortisol below 90% in response to this
high-dose suppression test.
H. Petrosal sinus sampling using CRH stimulation is a final
approach to confirming that ACTH is derived from the
pituitary. Criteria for confirming the pituitary as the
source of the ACTH include a ratio of ACTH between
one side of the petrosal sinus and the peripheral plasma
#2 or a ratio #3 during infusion of CRH as compared
with the level before infusion is begun. If one side has
an ACTH level that is a multiple $1.4 times the level
on the opposite side, then the adenoma is highly likely
to reside on that side.
I. Patients with suspected ectopic ACTH should have an
octreotide imaging performed with chest plain and
tomographic images obtained as indicated.
The goal of treatment of Cushing’s syndrome is the
eradication of any tumor, suppression of cortisol levels
to as low as possible, and avoidance of permanent hor-

mone dependency.
J. The treatment of choice for Cushing’s disease is transsphenoidal pituitary resection, irrespective of the size
of the pituitary tumor. The more extensive the resection, the greater the risk of permanent hypopituitarism. This may have particular implications for younger
patients who plan to have children. Pituitary radiation
can be provided to patients with unresectable or
residual tumors, although this is associated with a high
rate of hypopituitarism.
K. Adrenal tumors causing hypercortisolemia are best
resected. Medical management of unresectable tumors, or patients with metastatic hormonally active
adrenal cancer, is challenging because these malignancies are poorly responsive to adjuvant therapies.
Patients may benefit from the use of mitotane, an adrenal poison. These patients must be given supplemental glucocorticoids in replacement doses to ensure
that they do not develop adrenal insufficiency during
treatment. Patients with uncontrollable hypercortisolemia can benefit from adrenal steroid enzyme inhibitors such as ketoconazole or metyrapone. Experimental chemoradiotherapy or additional agents may
be available as part of a clinical trial.

References
Arnaldi G, Angeli A, Atkinson AB, et al. Diagnosis and complications of
Cushing’s syndrome: a consensus statement. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
2003;88(12):5593–5602.
Findling JW, Raff H. Screening and diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome.
Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 2005;34(2):385–402.
Lindsay JR, Nieman LK. Differential diagnosis and imaging in Cushing’s
syndrome. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 2005;34(2):403–421.
Raff H, Findling JW. A physiologic approach to diagnosis of the Cushing
syndrome. Ann Intern Med 2003;138(12):980–991.
Sonino N, Boscaro M, Fallo F. Pharmacologic management of Cushing
syndrome: new targets for therapy. Treat Endocrinol 2005;4(2):87–94.
Review.

157
Patient with Suspected CUSHING’S SYNDROME
(Cont’d from p 155)

G ACTH normal

ACTH low

or high

F Adrenal CT

MRI of pituitary

Clearly
abnormal

Normal or
equivocal

H Bilateral petrosal

sinus sampling
for ACTH with CRH
administration

No pituitary
gradient for
ACTH

Ectopic ACTH

Chest CT

I Significant

pituitary gradient
for ACTH

J K Cushing’s syndrome

