DEEP VENOUS THROMBOSIS

Deep venous thrombosis (DVT) is caused by intravascular deposits of predominantly fibrin, RBCs, platelets, and
WBC components, accumulating in a vein and producing
obstruction to venous outflow and/or vessel wall inflammation. The clinical manifestations depend on the severity of
these inflammatory processes. Often the initial sign is a pulmonary embolism (PE).
A. Detailed history taking should look for previous episodes and for inherited disorders of protein C and
S deficiency, antithrombin (AT) III deficiency, or an
abnormal factor V (factor VLEIDEN). With such deficiencies there is a strong family history of recurrent DVT or
PE that presents at an early age; !80% of patients with
protein C deficiency have had an episode of DVT or PE
by age 40. Patients with ATIII deficiency have a similar
presentation and also may have a history of failure to be
anticoagulated with heparin. Other hypercoagulable
causes are the MTHFR (5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate
reductase) gene mutation, prothrombin gene mutation,
and activated protein C resistance. Some are acquired,
such as the anticardiolipin antibodies. It is important
to obtain a complete drug and medication history,
including use of estrogen or oral contraceptives. A history of frequent abortions with a prolonged partial
thromboplastin time (PTT) should make one suspect a
lupus anticoagulant (i.e., anticardiolipin antibodies).
This also is present in some collagen vascular diseases
such as systemic lupus erythematosus. Surgery that
requires !30 minutes and certain surgical procedures
(orthopedics, those involving trauma to lower limbs
[e.g., knee surgery, urologic, gynecologic]) are associated with increased incidence of DVT. Other risk factors
are trauma, pregnancy, puerperium, congestive heart
failure (CHF), myocardial infarction, cerebrovascular
accidents, extremity paralysis, malignancy (especially of
the prostate, breast, or pancreas), obesity, varicose veins,
immobilization, use of estrogens, smoking, and age. All
of these may increase the risk of DVT by stasis and/or
increased activation of coagulation.
B. Pain is present in approximately 50% of patients with
DVT. Swelling and tenderness to compression also are
found in 75% of patients. The clinical diagnosis of
DVT is not accurate. Thrombosis does not always produce complete obstruction or inflammation. In 30% of
patients who have pain and swelling, there is proven
DVT. The classic Homan sign (discomfort in the calf
muscles on forced dorsiflexion of the foot) is not sensitive. It is noted in 33% of patients with positive venography and 50% with negative venography. Unilateral
244

C.

D.

E.

F.

swelling associated with discoloration is an important
sign that should alert one to the diagnosis.
The differential diagnosis includes ruptured Baker’s
cyst, muscle tear, cramp, hematoma, arthritis, bone
disease, varicose veins, and postphlebitic syndrome. If
no cause is apparent, consider noninvasive screening.
When the history and physical examination suggest
DVT, ancillary tests such as noninvasive impedance
plethysmography (IPG) and duplex ultrasound or invasive tests such as 125I and contrast venography will corroborate the diagnosis. Laboratory tests should include
platelet count, prothrombin time (PT), PTT, and Ddimer. The D-dimer test has emerged as a good
screening tool; a positive result supports further
workup to rule out DVT and pulmonary embolism in
the appropriate clinical setting, and a negative result
does not exclude it.
Noninvasive diagnostic tests available are IPG and
duplex ultrasonography (D-US). IPG is good for detecting proximal vein thrombosis and/or recurrent DVT but
is insensitive for detecting nonobstructive proximal
thrombosis and calf vein thrombosis. Its sensitivity is
83%–93%; its specificity is 83%–90%. It must be
repeated serially to increase its sensitivity. False-positive
results may occur with CHF, postoperative leg swelling,
excessive leg tension, or external compression. D-US
(sensitivity, 95%; specificity, 98%) is the ideal method of
screening patients with suspected DVT. It is good for
detecting proximal but not calf vein thrombosis. Calf
vein thrombosis usually requires no treatment other
than bed rest and elevation of the extremity. In
20%–30% of cases, however, the thrombus may extend
into the popliteal vein, and full anticoagulation is
required because of the increased incidence of PE.
Extension into the popliteal system often is missed on
initial noninvasive tests but may be seen if the examination is repeated after 3–5 days.
125
I with fibrinogen detects fibrin accretion to a thrombus and will be positive with active ongoing clotting.
It detects calf vein thrombosis in 90% of cases and
proximal vein thrombosis in 60%–80%. Fibrinogen carries with it the risks inherent with the use of any blood
product, including allergic reactions and transmittal of
infections. It is contraindicated in iodine allergy, pregnancy, and lactation. The combined approach of 125I and
IPG was positive in 81 of 86 patients with positive venograms; both tests were negative in 104 of 114 patients
who had negative venograms. This is a useful approach
if DVT is suspected clinically and 125I is inconclusive.
Venography is the gold standard but is invasive, is not

245
Patient with suspected DEEP VENOUS THROMBOSIS

A History
B Physical examination

Pain
Swelling
Homan’s sign:
Sensitivity 8%–10%
False-positive rate 11%–12%

C History and physical

D History and physical

examination with
low probability for
DVT

examination suspicious for DVT

E Noninvasive

Consider:
Ruptured Baker’s
cyst
Muscle tear
Hematoma
Arthritis
Bone disease
Varicosities

F Invasive

tests

IPG

125I

D-US

Negative

Positive

Repeat
tests

Negative

tests

with
Fibrinogen

Venography

Negative

Positive

IPG
or
D-US

Calf
vein

Positive

Negative

Standard
Therapy

Follow-up:
IPG
D-US
Negative

Positive
Positive
Therapy

G

Standard Therapy:
Bed Rest
Warfarin
Heparin

always available, and may not visualize the deep venous
system. It may itself cause a DVT.
G. If the diagnosis is confirmed, begin treatment. Standard treatment includes IV heparin, SC heparin, low
molecular weight heparins, oral anticoagulants, bed
rest, and extremity elevation. Patients with protein C
deficiency may have skin necrosis and increased sensitivity to warfarin. Start therapy with IV heparin
bolus, 5000 U, followed by continuous infusion of
heparin, approximately 1000 U/h or 800–10,000 U
SC heparin every 6–8 hours. Monitor activated PTT
at 6 hours and thereafter until stabilized at 1.5–2
times control values. Obtain a baseline platelet count
and monitor every 3 days while the patient is taking
heparin. Watch for heparin-associated thrombocytopenia and heparin-associated thrombosis. Alternatively, Lovenox twice daily at a dosage of 1 mg/kg SC
every 12 hours or at dosage of 1.5 mg/kg once a day
could be used instead of heparin. Begin warfarin sodium on the first day by instituting the estimated
daily maintenance dosage (5–10 mg). Maintain INR
at 2.0–3.0. It usually takes 72–96 hours for the INR
to reach this range, and heparin should be continued

Positive

Negative

Standard
Therapy

Bed rest
Elevation

until the INR is at this level. Treatment should last at
least 12 weeks.
References
Hommes DW, Bura A, Mazzolai L, et al. Subcutaneous heparin compared
with continuous intravenous heparin administration in the initial treatment of deep vein thrombosis: a meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med
1992;116:279.
Hull R, Raskob G, Pineo G, et al. A comparison of subcutaneous
low-molecular-weight heparin with warfarin sodium for prophylaxis
against deep-vein thrombosis after hip or knee implantation. N Engl
J Med 1993;329:1370.
Hull RD, Raskob GE, Rosenbloom D, et al. Heparin for 5 days as compared
with 10 days in the initial treatment of proximal venous thrombosis.
N Engl J Med 1990;322:1260.
Hyers T, Hull RD, Weg J. Antithrombotic therapy for venous thromboembolic disease. Chest 1989;95:37s.
Lensing AWA, Hirsh J, Buller HR. Diagnosis of venous thrombosis. In
Colman RW, Hirsh J, Marder VJ, et al, eds. Hemostasis and Thrombosis,
3rd ed. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott, 1994.
Pini M, Pattachini C, Quintavalla R, et al. Subcutaneous vs. intravenous
heparin in the treatment of deep venous thrombosis—a randomized
clinical trial. Thromb Haemost 1990;64:222.
Salzman EW, Hirsh J. The epidemiology, pathogenesis, and natural history of
venous thrombosis. In Colman RW, Hirsh J, Marder VJ, et al, eds. Hemostasis and Thrombosis, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott, 1994.
White R, McGahan JP, Daschbach M, et al. Diagnosis of deep vein
thrombosis using duplex ultrasound. Ann Intern Med 1989;111:297.

