DEPRESSION


Depression occurs in children, adolescents, adults, and
the elderly. It is found in all ethnic groups, has high prevalence, and is a significant cause of disability worldwide.
Following hypertension, it is the most commonly encountered chronic illness in general medical practice. It can
be an emotion, a specific disease entity, or a symptom
of another mental or medical illness such as schizophrenia or thyroid dysfunction. It can also be iatrogenically
induced by medications such as glucocorticoids, narcotics, and benzodiazepines.
Dysphoria, a milder form of major depression, occurs in
5% of the general population, with women and persons
aged 25–44 years most at risk. The full syndrome of major
depression carries significant morbidity and mortality in
terms of suicide risk and poorer outcome of concomitant
medical disorders. Many patients with depression present
first to the primary care physician with somatic concerns
and seek a medical diagnosis or treatment for anxiety
or “nerves,” which often leads to overlooking the proper
diagnosis and delaying treatment.
A. Depression is a clinical syndrome without a specific
laboratory test to confirm the diagnosis; comprehensive
clinical assessments provide the main data.
B. Criteria for diagnosis of major depression include
having at least five of nine symptoms present daily
or almost daily during the same 2-week period and
indicative of a change from previous functioning. Symptoms are (1) depressed mood, (2) markedly reduced
interest or pleasure in activities, (3) significant weight
loss or gain or decrease or increase in appetite, (4) insomnia or hypersomnia, (5) psychomotor agitation or
retardation, (6) fatigue or low energy, (7) feelings of
worthlessness or inordinate guilt, (8) difficulty concentrating or indecisiveness, and (9) recurrent thoughts of
death or suicide or a suicide attempt. Broad differential
diagnosis must include organic mood disorder, depressed, and a major depression.
C. A screening battery of laboratory tests helps rule out
specific organic causes. In combination with the history and physical examination, findings may suggest
more specific laboratory studies (see D). Specialized
tests that are sensitive, but not specific, to major
depression include the dexamethasone suppression
test, the thyrotropin-releasing hormone stimulation
test, and polysomnography.
D. Differential diagnosis for organic causes includes substance abuse or dependence and use of certain prescription drugs. The latter group includes antihypertensives,
662

E.

F.

G.
H.

hormones, analgesics, anticancer drugs, tiparkinsonian
drugs, antianxiety and hypnotic drugs, and GI drugs;
endocrine and metabolic disorders (especially thyroid
and adrenal); nutritional deficiencies (vitamin B1, niacin,
folate, vitamin B12); and heavy metal toxicity (e.g., lead).
Depression in alcoholics may resolve with abstinence.
Depressive symptoms follow stroke in up to 60% of
cases within 2 years. Treatment of underlying medical
problems may lead to resolution of depression; if not,
standard antidepressant treatment strategies often are
effective.
Initial antidepressant regimens, especially in patients
whose illness is medically complex, often involve selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs; e.g., fluoxetine, sertraline, paroxetine). Secondary amine tricyclics such as nortriptyline and desipramine are an
important alternative, especially for comorbid chronic
pain. These may have less anticholinergic side effects
and therefore are better tolerated than amitriptyline or
doxepin. If SSRIs and tricyclics fail or are contraindicated, other choices include bupropion, nefazodone,
venlafaxine, or monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs;
phenelzine, tranylcypromine). Low-dose trazodone
(note priapism as a possible side effect in males) is
sometimes used for insomnia, in combination with
activating agents such as fluoxetine. Choose medication to specific target symptoms (e.g., agitation versus
psychomotor retardation) and address side effect
profile. Watch for drug interactions with fluoxetine and
MAOIs. MAOIs necessitate a tyramine-free diet.
Amphetamine-based stimulants may mobilize patients
who are apathetic and medically ill, but their long-term
efficacy for major depression is uncertain.
Up to 50% of patients who are unipolar depressed
with partial or no response to antidepressant therapy
may respond more fully to the addition of lithium.
More controversial augmentation strategies include
buspirone supplementation (especially in agitated
depression), thyroid supplementation, combination
therapy of fluoxetine with a tricyclic, and combination therapy of an MAOI with a tricyclic; the last
two approaches involve a significant risk of drug
interactions.
Growing evidence suggests that bright-light therapy
may suffice in some cases of winter depression; more
standard somatic therapies also are effective.
Recent studies have shown the need for a combination
of antidepressant and antipsychotic drugs rather than
single-agent therapy to treat psychotic depression.

663
Patient with DYSPHORIC MOOD

A Medical and psychiatric history
Medication/substance history
Physical examination
Mental status examination

Additional symptoms and signs

B 5 of 9 severe symptoms

during same 2-wk period

Chronic course
Less severe depression

History of
stressor !6 mo

Cont’d on p 665

Cont’d on p 665

Consider:
Organic mood disorder, depressed
Major depression

C Diagnostic tests:

CBC, ESR
Blood chemistries
Thyroid index, thyroid-stimulating hormone
Rapid plasma reagin, HIV screen
Head CT or MRI
Toxic screen

Organic factor present

Specific organic factor not present

D Consider:

Consider:
Major
depression
with or
without
melancholia

Substance-induced
depressive disorder
Medication-induced
depressive disorder
Endocrine/metabolic
disorder
Nutritional deficiency
Toxic disorder
Malignancy
Infection
Neurologic disorder
Cardiopulmonary
disorder/hypoxia

Treat specific
underlying
disorder

Psychotic
symptoms

Consider:
Seasonal
affective
disorder

Consider:
Major depression
with psychotic
features
Schizoaffective
disorder
Depressive
disorder NOS

G Bright-

light
therapy

H

Specific diagnostic tests

Eliminate
drug

Seasonal
pattern

E

Substance
abuse
treatment

F

Combination
Antidepressant
and Antipsychotic
Medications
"
Psychotherapy

Manic or
hypomanic
history
Consider:
Bipolar disorder
Cyclothymia

I

Antidepressant
Medication
"
Lithium
"
Psychotherapy

Antidepressant
Medication
"
Psychotherapy
Medication
Augmentation

J

I. Patients who are bipolar may switch into manic episodes
during treatment with antidepressant medications alone.
This may necessitate concomitant coverage with lithium
or another mood-stabilizing agent (e.g., divalproex, carbamazepine). Anecdotal evidence suggests possible usefulness of bupropion in treating bipolar depression.

ELECTROCONVULSIVE THERAPY

J. Electroconvulsive therapy is the most effective treatment for major depression, especially for the subtype
with psychotic features. It is the treatment of choice for
acute suicidality, severe cachexia and dehydration secondary to poor intake, many medically complex major
depressions, and antidepressant medication failures.
(Continued on page 664)

664
K. A chronic course of at least 2 years and a less severe
depressive picture suggest a dysthymic disorder, which
can co-occur with major depression. Dysphoria or fluctuating mood instability is also characteristic of a range of
chronic personality disorders that vary in responsiveness
to psychotherapeutic interventions.
L. An identifiable stressor, maladaptive symptoms lasting
!6 months, and a generally less severe depressive picture suggest an adjustment disorder with depressed
mood, which usually resolves with time and supportive
psychotherapy.
References
Brown SA, Inaba RK, Gillin JC, et al. Alcoholism and affective disorder:
clinical course of depressive symptoms. Am J Psychiatry 1995;152:45.
Charney DS, Miller HL, Licinio J, et al. Treatment of depression. In
Schatzberg AF, Nemeroff CB, eds. Textbook of Psychopharmacology.
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press, 1995:575.

Cole S, Raju M. Making the diagnosis of depression in the primary care
setting. Am J Med 1996;101:10S.
Fava GA, Grandi S, Zielezny M, et al. Four-year outcome for cognitive
behavioral treatment of residual symptoms in major depression. Am J
Psychiatry 1996;153:945.
Kleinman S. Culture and depression. N Engl J Med 2004;351:
951–953.
Klerman GL, Weissman MM. The course, morbidity, and costs of
depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1992;49:831.
McCoy DM. Treatment considerations for depression in patients
with significant medical comorbidity. J Fam Practice 1996;43
(6 Suppl):S35.
Nierenberg AA. Treatment choice after one antidepressant fails: a survey
of Northeastern psychiatrists. J Clin Psychiatry 1991;52:383.
Wells KB, Sturm R, Sherbourne CD, et al. Caring for Depression.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1996.
Whooley MA, Simon GE. Primary care: managing depression in medical
outpatients. N Engl J Med 2000;343:1942–1950.

665
Patient with DYSPHORIC MOOD
(Cont’d from p 663)

K Chronic course

Less severe depression

Consider:
Dysthymia
Psychotherapy
#
Antidepressants

Consider:
Concomitant
personality
disorder
Psychotherapy

L History of

stressor !6 mo

Consider:
Adjustment
disorder with
depressed mood
Psychotherapy

