DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT OF ACUTE PULMONARY EDEMA


Acute pulmonary edema is an emergency that necessitates
admission to the hospital. Cardiogenic pulmonary edema
results from an increase in left atrial pressure with a resultant increase in pulmonary venous and capillary pressure.
This results in extravasation of fluid into the alveoli and
impairment of gas exchange in the lungs.
A. The initial history and physical examination should be
targeted toward confirming the diagnosis of pulmonary
edema, assessing the severity, and identifying any
immediate underlying precipitants. Symptoms may
include acute or progressive shortness of breath, cough,
orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, and occasionally hemoptysis. Clinical signs include tachypnea,
tachycardia, an ausculatory S3 or S4, elevation in
the jugular venous pressure, crackles, and hypoxia
depending on the degree of alveolar edema.
B. Of significant importance to the initial patient assessment is the identification of patients with imminent
respiratory failure who will require early and intensive
therapy with either invasive or noninvasive ventilatory
support. All patients should be provided with supplemental oxygen. ABGs may be required to assess adequacy of ventilation and oxygenation.
C. Patients with signs of hypoperfusion, including systolic blood pressure (SBP) of !90 mm Hg, cool extremities, altered mental status, and poor urine output, may be candidates for early hemodynamic support
with inotropic therapy or intraaortic balloon counterpulsation. Urgent coronary angiography and revascularization should be performed if myocardial ischemia
is suspected as the etiology of pulmonary edema and
cardiovascular collapse.
D. The initial diagnostic workup should focus on the
confirmation of pulmonary edema, identification of the
severity, and investigation for an underlying cause.
Chest radiograph may show bilateral perihilar edema
and cephalization of pulmonary vascular markings. An
ECG may identify any arrhythmias, ischemia, or injury.
A serum brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) level of !100

84

pg/ml makes the diagnosis of heart failure (HF) very
unlikely, whereas a BNP of "500 pg/ml increases the
likelihood of HF. Occasionally, right-sided heart catheterization may be required to confirm the diagnosis and
establish the hemodynamic profile. Baseline renal and
electrolyte testing is critical to assess the contribution of
renal insufficiency to the clinical picture. An echocardiogram will provide useful information about systolic,
diastolic, and valvular function.
E. If the clinical assessment and supporting diagnostic
evaluations do not support a diagnosis of pulmonary
edema, other pulmonary conditions, including pneumonia, acute pulmonary embolism, and noncardiogenic pulmonary edema (i.e., acute respiratory distress
syndrome [ARDS]), should be considered.
F. Therapy should be instituted immediately, often concurrently with diagnostic evaluation. Cardiogenic pulmonary edema is a manifestation of high left-sided filling
pressures; thus investigation and management should be
tailored to the specific causes:
• Acute ischemia—This is evidenced by history, ischemic ECG changes, and abnormal cardiac enzymes. Therapy will involve appropriate treatment
for the acute coronary syndrome concurrent with
HF therapy.
• Acute arrhythmia—HF can result from either
tachyarrhythmias or bradyarrhythmias, and therapy
will depend on the primary rhythm disturbance.
• Valvular—Acute mitral regurgitation and aortic insufficiency in particular may present in this fashion.
Acute management involves hemodynamic stabilization with pharmacologic and/or mechanical afterload
and preload reduction and surgical consultation.
• Hypertensive crisis—IV agents, such as
nitroprusside or labetalol, should be used to acutely
lower the mean arterial pressure by 25%–30%.
• Acutely decompensated chronic HF—Anemia,
infection, dietary indiscretion, and medication
noncompliance are all other potential causes precipitating pulmonary edema in those with chronic HF.
(Continued on page 86)

85
Patient with ACUTE PULMONARY EDEMA

A History

Physical examination

B Imminent respiratory
failure anticipated?

C No

Yes

Evidence of clinical
hypoperfusion or
cardiogenic shock?

Options:
BiPAP/CPAP trial
Endotracheal intubation
If blood pressure elevated,
consider vasodilation
with nitroglycerin or
nitroprusside
ICU admission

Markers increasing the
estimate of severity:
Abnormal oximetry
History of previous
CHF admissions
SBP !115 mm Hg
Age "75 yr
Na !136 mEq/L
Creatinine "2.0 mg/dl
Known ejection fraction !40%
Poor response to initial therapy
Tachypnea (respiratory rate "20) or
tachycardia (heart rate "95 bpm)

No

Yes
Options:
Inotropes
Consider
hemodynamic
monitoring
ICU admission
Consider urgent
catheterization

D Diagnostic workup:

ECG
Chest x-ray
O2 saturation
Cardiac markers
BNP
CBC
Electrolytes and renal function
Echocardiogram

Diagnosis of cardiogenic
pulmonary edema likely?
No

E Consider other
diagnosis and
treatment

Yes

F Initiate therapy based

on severity and possible
underlying cause
Cont’d on p 87

BiPAP, Biphasic positive airway pressure; CPAP, continuous positive airway pressure.

86
G. The dose of diuretic will vary among individual patients.
All patients with pulmonary edema should receive IV
diuretics to ensure a quick response and assist with
pulmonary venous dilation. In individuals taking chronic
diuretics, an initial estimate is to administer an IV dose
that is double the patient’s baseline oral dose. In patients
who are diuretic naïve, an initial IV dose of furosemide
0.5–1.0 mg/kg can be used. If an adequate response is
not seen within 1 hour, the dose of diuretic should be
doubled.
H. IV vasodilator therapy may have many beneficial effects
in patients with acute pulmonary edema, including relief
of cardiac ischemia (nitroglycerin), pulmonary vasodilation (nitroprusside, nesiritide, and itroglycerin), improvement in dyspnea (IV nesiritide, IV nitroglycerin), and reduction in afterload (nitroprusside).
I. The use of inotropic support in acute pulmonary edema
should be reserved for patients presenting with advanced symptoms of congestion combined with
evidence of hypoperfusion. When used, the dose of inotrope should be titrated slowly to a hemodynamic goal

(dobutamine 2–10 #g/kg/min, dopamine 1–5 #g/kg/
min, or milrinone 0.375–0.75 #g/kg/min), such as improvement in blood pressure or improved clinical perfusion manifest by an increase in pulse pressure, mental
status, or increased urine output. Attempts should be
made to wean inotropic therapy as soon as possible
once the patient is stabilized.
References
1. Drazner MH, Rame JE, Stevenson LW, Dries SL. Prognostic importance of elevated jugular venous pressure and a third heart sound in
patients with heart failure. N Engl J Med 2001;345:574–581.
2. Francis GS, Pierpont GL. Pathophysiology of congestive heart failure
secondary to congestive and ischemic cardiomyopathy. In Shaver JA,
ed. Cardiomyopathies: Clinical Presentation, Differential Diagnosis,
and Management. Philadelphia: FA Davis, 1988:57–74.
3. Maisel A, Hollander JE, Guss D, et al. Primary results of the Rapid
Emergency Department Heart Failure Outpatient Trial (REDHOT).
A multicenter study of B-type natriuretic peptide levels, emergency
department decision making, and outcomes in patients presenting with
shortness of breath. J Am Coll Cardiol 2004;44:1328–1333.
4. Nohria, A, Lewis E, Stevenson LW. Medical management of advanced
heart failure. JAMA 2002;287:628–640.

87
Patient with ACUTE PULMONARY EDEMA
(Cont’d from p 85)

G Low clinical severity

(absence of any highrisk feature)
O2
Loop diuretic
Patient education
Rule out reversible/
precipitating causes
Reevaluate response to
therapy frequently to
determine disposition

H Moderate clinical severity

O2
IV diuretic
Vasodilator therapy
as needed
Treat/investigate
underlying causes
In and out monitoring
Admit to monitored bed

I Critical severity (any signs

of impending respiratory failure
or hypoperfusion)
O2
IV diuretic bolus then
infusion if needed
Consider IV inotrope
or vasodilator
Continuous monitoring
of urine output
Critical care unit bed
Treat/investigate
underlying causes

