DIASTOLIC MURMURS


Cardiac murmurs are generated by turbulent blood flow
and adjacent soft-tissue vibration. Turbulent or nonlaminar
blood flow occurs in response to rapid acceleration or deceleration of flow such as that which occurs across a narrowed
valve or vessel segment.
A. Murmurs in diastole have several possible causes, including regurgitant flow across a semilunar valve (aortic
or pulmonic), forward flow though a stenotic or abnormal atrioventricular (AV) valve (mitral or tricuspid), or
flow through an anatomic defect (ventricular septum).
Once a murmur has been determined to be diastolic
in timing, a series of steps can be undertaken to identify the exact cause. The relative timing during diastole
(early, middle, or late) and the location of optimal intensity are essential for determination of the underlying pathology.
B. Timing: Diastolic murmurs are characterized based on
the part of the diastolic portion of the cardiac cycle during
which they occur. Early diastolic murmurs begin with the
aortic or pulmonic valve components of the second heart
sound and have a steady decrescendo configuration. Middiastolic murmurs begin at the end of the silent interval
following the second heart sound and terminate well before the first heart sound. The murmurs of late diastole
(presystolic murmurs) occur immediately before the first
heart sound and often obscure it.
C. Early Diastolic Murmurs: The murmurs of early diastole are most commonly caused by the regurgitant flow of
blood across a semilunar valve. Aortic regurgitation produces a decrescendo murmur heard best at the superior
right sternal border with radiation toward the apex. It is
best heard with use of the diaphragm of the stethoscope
in the patient who is seated and slightly bent forward. The
duration of the murmur is useful in determining the acuity of aortic valve incompetence, with acute valve failure
producing a brief murmur and chronic, compensated
valve failure resulting in a more sustained murmur.
The murmur of pulmonic valvular regurgitation is
best heard in the left 2nd or 3rd intercostal space (ICS).
Similar to aortic regurgitation, it has a decrescendo configuration. Pulmonic regurgitation in adults is most commonly seen in conjunction with pulmonary hypertension
(Graham Steell’s murmur) and is thus distinguishable
from aortic regurgitation by the presence, of other signs
of elevated pulmonary artery pressure, including an accentuated P2 component of S2 and right ventricular hypertrophy (RVH). Occasionally, pulmonary regurgitation
72

results from congenital absence or abnormality of the
pulmonic valve and is distinguished from that resulting
from pulmonary hypertension by the absence of these
signs.
A rare cause of an early diastolic murmur is flow
through a stenotic coronary artery, most often the
proximal anterior descending artery that is in close
proximity to the anterior chest wall.
D. Mid-Diastolic Murmurs: The murmurs of mid-diastole are generated by turbulent flow across one of the AV
valves. They begin well after the second heart sound and
tend to have a low-pitched rumbling quality. Mitral stenosis, most commonly a result of rheumatic heart disease, a low-pitched rumbling murmur initiated with an
opening snap and heard best at the cardiac apex, is best
heard with the patient in the left lateral decubitus position with use of the stethoscope bell. The duration of the
murmur reflects the magnitude of the pressure gradient
across the stenotic mitral valve and thus reflects the severity of mitral valve narrowing. Mitral stenosis murmurs
that extend through until S1 reflect severe disease.
Tricuspid stenosis produces a murmur that is similar in timing and quality as that produced by mitral
valve stenosis but is heard best at the left lower sternal
border. The most characteristic element of the murmur of tricuspid stenosis is its increase in intensity with
inspiration.
Mid-diastolic murmurs can also occur with impediment of transatrioventricular valve flow by tumors such
as an atrial myxoma, in conjunction with aortic regurgitation (Austin Flint murmur), and with conditions
with supranormal cardiac flow (shunts and high-output
physiology).
E. Late Diastolic Murmurs: The murmurs of late diastole are generated by the same underlying valve abnormalities that produce the aforementioned mid-systolic
murmurs and are thus often more a late diastolic augmentation of a mid-diastolic murmur. This phenomenon
results from a rapid increase in transvalvular flow from
atrial contraction.
F. Location: Diastolic murmurs generated by regurgitant
flow back through the semilunar valves are loudest in
intensity at the left (pulmonic valve) and right (aortic
valve) sternal border in the 2nd ICS. Those caused by
turbulent flow across stenotic AV valves are heard lower
on the chest wall at the left sternal border, in the 5th–6th
ICS (tricuspid valve), and in the mid-clavicular line
5th–6th ICS (mitral valve).

73
Patient with a DIASTOLIC MURMUR

A Confirm timing is diastolic

B Determine timing within diastole
D E Mid- or late

C Early diastolic

diastolic murmur
(low-pitched rumble)

murmur
(decrescendo)

F Determine location

F Determine location

of maximal intensity

of maximal intensity

Left sternal
border, 2nd ICS

Right sternal
border, 2nd ICS

Left sternal
border, 5th ICS

Aortic
regurgitation

Pulmonic
regurgitation

↑ intensity with
inspiration?

Soft, confined
to early diastole

Louder, persisting
to late diastole

Prominent
P2, RVH

Acute aortic
regurgitation

Chronic aortic
regurgitation

Graham
Steell’s murmur

G Obtain:

Echocardiogram
Consider:
Aortic valve surgery

Absent signs
of pulmonary
hypertension
Congenital
pulmonic
regurgitation

Yes

Mid-clavicular
border, 6th ICS

No

Mitral stenosis
Tricuspid
stenosis

G Obtain:

Echocardiogram
Consider:
Diuresis
Valvuloplasty
or surgery

G Obtain:

Echocardiogram
Consider:
Valvuloplasty
or surgery

G Obtain:

Echocardiogram
Consider:
Surgery

G. The management of diastolic murmurs depends on the
etiology, the acuity, and the hemodynamic significance
of the underlying abnormality. Echocardiography can
be used to confirm the cause of a murmur. Aortic regurgitation and pulmonic regurgitation generally require surgical correction, though observation of the
asymptomatic patient is a reasonable strategy. The optimal management of mitral stenosis is complicated.

Options include medical management, mitral valve
surgery, and percutaneous valvuloplasty.
Reference
Bonow RO, Carabello B, et al. ACC/AHA guidelines for the management
of patients with valvular heart disease. J Am Coll Cardiol 1998;
32(5):1486–1588.

