DIFFUSE INTERSTITIAL LUNG DISEASE

Diffuse interstitial lung disease (ILD) constitutes a broad
variety of disease. Diagnosis can be a challenge, and in some
cases surgical lung biopsy will ultimately be required. Treatment can also be challenging because of a lack of effective
therapy for many of these diseases. A comprehensive guide
to treatment of these diseases is outside the scope of this
algorithm, which provides a general approach to diagnosis
and treatment.
A. A comprehensive history is the first step in characterizing
diffuse ILD. Initial questions should include a determination of the extent of the patient’s dyspnea with particular emphasis on overall functional status and the impact
of dyspnea on activities of daily living. Review the tempo
and timing of the progression of symptoms, including
dyspnea and cough. The presence of hemoptysis will
guide further diagnostic evaluation. Because many interstitial lung diseases are related to collagen vascular diseases, a rheumatologic review of systems can be useful.
Assess environmental exposures, including home and
workplace. Because there are links between smoking and
a variety of medications with ILD, review both of these
histories. Include a family history because some ILDs
have a genetic component.
B. The physical examination should include the patient’s
respiratory rate and observation for signs of respiratory
distress. Oxygen saturation, at rest and with ambulation, should be measured. Classic pulmonary findings
of diffuse ILD include bibasilar “Velcro-like” crackles,
particularly in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF).
Other diseases, such as bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia (BOOP), may present with diffuse
crackles, inspiratory squeaks and pops, and wheezes.
Hypoxia can lead to pulmonary hypertension and cor
pulmonale, which can result in an accentuated P2 heart
sound, elevated jugular venous pressure, and peripheral edema. A murmur of tricuspid regurgitation and
fixed splitting of the second heart sound (as a result of
the inability to decrease intrathoracic pressure during
inspiration because of persistently elevated right-sided
heart pressures) may be noted. Other peripheral signs
may include clubbing and signs of rheumatologic disease, such as joint swelling or tight skin.
C. Laboratory values should include a CBC with differential (to look for signs of infection, eosinophilia, and
anemia). Consider an ESR, ANA, antiglomerular basement membrane antibody, and possibly other rheumatologic laboratory tests based on suspicion of a specific
illness. Antibodies for detection of hypersensitivity
500

D.

E.

F.

G.

H.

I.

pneumonitis to environmental allergens should be sent
if this is suspected. Peripheral blood eosinophilia (!1
" 109 eosinophils) should raise the question of an eosinophilic pneumonia. For suspected sarcoidosis, a serum calcium level and angiotensin-converting enzyme
level may be checked, although neither is diagnostic.
Pulmonary function tests (PFTs) should be obtained
and often show a restrictive deficit as manifest by a
decreased total lung capacity (TLC #80% predicted).
Certain diffuse ILDs, such as pulmonary Langerhans’
cell histiocytosis (PLCH), lymphomatoid granulomatosis, or sarcoidosis, may also have an obstructive component. It is often useful to have baseline lung function
tests prior to beginning treatment to be able to monitor
response to therapy.
A chest x-ray (CXR) should be obtained on all patients
with suspected ILD. Historically, the sensitivity of a
CXR to diagnose chronic diffuse ILD has been considered to be around 90%. The sensitivity of modern
chest radiograph machines to diagnose chronic diffuse
ILD may be even higher.
A normal CXR in a patient suspected of having disease
should prompt a chest CT scan with high-resolution thin
sections to allow for the greatest ability to diagnose early
ILD. Signs of diffuse ILD on CXR should also be evaluated with CT scan to better characterize the disease
process.
If the disease process is thought secondary to an environmental exposure or drug, eliminate the inciting
agent. Depending on the time course of the disease,
observation for clinical resolution of the disease process may be acceptable before proceeding to more invasive means of diagnosis.
A characteristic CT scan pattern and supporting clinical
information may be sufficient to be diagnostic. The
presence of honeycombing with basal and peripheral
predominance is considered by some to be sufficient
evidence for a diagnosis of IPF, whereas others believe
that biopsy is required for diagnostic certainty. Other
diseases with characteristic radiographic patterns, such
as PLCH or lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM), may
also be diagnosed radiographically when patient history
is also consistent with the disease process and when biopsy may be difficult.
Bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) alone
may allow for a diagnosis in some of the diffuse ILDs.
It should be performed in cases of suspected infection
such as Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP) or in
suspected cases of eosinophilic Pneumonia. A finding of

501
Patient with DIFFUSE INTERSTITIAL LUNG DISEASE

A History

B Physical

G Disease thought

to be secondary
to drug or exposure
Eliminate
agent

examination

D PFTs

C Laboratory
values

H Above consistent

with diseases such
as IPF, PLCH, LAM

I

Suspected infection,
AEP, CEP, DAH,
PLCH, CBD, PAP

Consider treatment
without biopsy

E CXR

J Suspected

sarcoidosis,
lymphangitic
carcinomatosis
and others

F Chest CT

K Less invasive

diagnostic means
unlikely to be
successful given
suspected disease

No recovery
BAL
Nondiagnostic

Transbronchial
biopsy —TBNA
Nondiagnostic

VATS or openlung biopsy
Treatment based on
biopsy results

!25% eosinophils on BAL is generally considered consistent with acute idiopathic eosinophilic pneumonia
(AEP), whereas !40% eosinophils is indicative of a diagnosis of chronic eosinophilic pneumonia (CEP). BAL
should be performed in suspected cases of diffuse alveolar hemorrhage (DAH). Multiple lavage specimens in
which bloody aspirate fails to clear and hemosiderinladen macrophages are seen are characteristic of DAH.
BAL may also be helpful in a variety of rarer diseases.
These include PLCH (to look for !5% CDa1$ cells),
chronic beryllium disease (CBD; to send cells from BAL
for a beryllium lymphocyte proliferation test), and pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (PAP; to look for milky fluid
and periodic acid–Schiff positive fluid.
J. Transbronchial biopsy performed via a flexible bronchoscope may be the diagnostic procedure of choice for
a few ILDs. For suspected sarcoidosis, taking a minimum of four biopsies provides a sensitivity of !90%.
Transbronchial needle aspiration (TBNA) of lymph
nodes via bronchoscopy may also be helpful in making
this diagnosis. Lymphangitic spread of cancer and hypersensitivity pneumonitis can be diagnosed by transbronchial biopsy. However, for most ILDs, diagnostic
yield is often low and many clinicians would recommend proceeding directly to surgical biopsy.
K. For suspected disease processes in which less invasive
studies have been unrevealing or are thought unlikely to

reveal a diagnosis, surgical biopsy may be indicated.
Surgical biopsy is now most often performed by videoassisted thoracoscopic surgical (VATS) biopsy. This form
of biopsy is performed through three small incisions and
is generally well tolerated. A chest tube is usually maintained for 1–2 days following the procedure with a short
period of hospitalization. Mediastinoscopy should be
performed if lymph nodes are enlarged. Open lung
biopsy may occasionally be necessary based on the distribution of the disease process. The decision of which
route of biopsy to pursue should be undertaken after
thoughtful discussion with specialists and with the
patient. Further therapy is then guided by the results of
the biopsy.

References
Cottin V, Cordier JF. Eosinophilic pneumonias. Allergy 2005;60:841–857.
Epler GR, McLoud TC, Gaensler EA, et al. Normal chest roentgenograms in chronic diffuse infiltrative lung disease. N Engl J Med
1978;298(17):934–939.
King TE. Approach to the adult with interstitial lung disease. UpToDate
Online. Available at: www.uptodate.com. Accessed March 20, 2006.
Lynch DA, Godwin JD, Safrin S, et al. High-resolution computed tomography in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2005;172:488–493.
Schwarz MI, King TE. Interstitial Lung Disease, 4th ed. London: BC
Decker, 2003.

