DILATED PUPIL

One must ensure that the dilated pupil is the abnormal pupil
by examining the patient in both bright and dim ambient
light. If the anisocoria is greater in bright lighting and the
larger pupil constricts poorly to penlight examination, then
the dilated pupil is the abnormal pupil.
Physiologic anisocoria occurs in approximately 20% of the
population. It is characterized by anisocoria that is similar in
both bright and dark, normal pupillary constriction to light,
and anisocoria that is usually !1 mm in diameter.
A. Acute angle-closure glaucoma is characterized by acute
pain with blurred vision and colored halos around
lights. On examination, the pupil is unreactive and
fixed in a mid-dilated position. The conjunctiva is typically hyperemic, with corneal edema demonstrated by
a dulled reflection of light from the corneal surface.
The intraocular pressure is acutely elevated.
This is a medical emergency that requires prompt
treatment to prevent permanent visual loss. If a TonoPen is available to confirm acutely elevated intraocular
pressure, Timoptic 0.5% 1 gtt and/or Diamox 500 mg
PO/IV should be given. The patient should be immediately referred to an ophthalmologist for definitive
management.
B. In a patient with a dilated pupil, an extraocular motility
deficit with or without associated ptosis indicates a third
nerve palsy until proved otherwise. The patient may have
periorbital pain or headache. Immediate neuroimaging
should be obtained, with MRI/MRA of the brain with
gadolinium to rule out an aneurysm or mass.
C. Unilateral or asymmetric exposure to adrenergic agents
will cause mydriasis associated with a widened palpebral

468

fissure and blanched conjunctiva resulting from vasoconstriction. Common agents include over-the-counter
vasoconstrictors for “red eyes” and adrenergic glaucoma
medications. Accommodation remains unaffected.
D. Parasympathetic blockade of pupillary constriction typically results in a very large pupil and is associated with
loss of accommodation. Common causative agents include atropine, scopolamine patch, and night-blooming
flowers.
E. Surgery, prior ocular trauma, or prior inflammation may
cause a dilated pupil that may have irregular margins.
F. An Adie’s tonic pupil demonstrates cholinergic supersensitivity; the dilated pupil constricts significantly
more than the contralateral pupil in response to dilute
pilocarpine (0.125%). Additional signs seen without
pharmacologic intervention include: (1) The affected
pupil constricts slowly in response to light, but constricts quickly with accommodation (looking at a near
target. It also remains tonic (redilates slowly) after a
prolonged accomodative effort. (2) Segmental palsy of
the iris sphincter, seen as an irregularly constricting
pupil margin.

References
Bradford CA, ed. Basic Ophthalmology, 8th ed. San Francisco: American
Academy of Ophthalmology, 2004.
Kaiser PA, Friedman NJ, Pineda R II. The Massachusetts Eye and Ear
Infirmary Illustrated Manual of Ophthalmology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia:
Saunders, 2003.
Trobe JD. The Physician’s Guide to Eye Care, 3rd ed. San Francisco:
American Academy of Ophthalmology, 2006.

469
Patient with DILATED PUPIL

Pilocarpine 0.125% gtt OU

Additional signs

Acute pain
with red eye

A

Acute angleclosure glaucoma

Extraocular motility
deficit " ptosis

B

Third nerve
palsy

Blanched conjunctiva
and widened palpebral
fissure

C

Adrenergic
mydriasis

No constriction
of dilated pupil

Pilocarpine 1% gtt OU

Pupillary constriction

B

Cholinergic
supersensitivity

F

Adie’s tonic
pupil

No constriction
of dilated pupil

Third nerve
palsy

D

Pharmacologic
blockade

E

Iris injury

