DISTURBANCES OF SMELL AND TASTE

Dysfunction of smell or taste usually is not a disease entity in
itself; it is usually secondary to another disease process such
as sinus disease, medications, toxins, neurodegenerative
conditions, tumor, or trauma. Both are insidious symptoms;
the patient often does not notice loss of taste, especially
when the onset is gradual. Loss of smell, however, may be
noticed by the patient as a change in taste sensation. Anosmia is the absence of smell sensation; dysosmia or parosmia
is a distorted smell perception, either with or without an
odorant stimulus present; and hyposmia is a reduced sense
of smell. Abnormalities in taste sensation are classified into
ageusia (absence of taste perception), hypogeusia (diminished taste), and dysgeusia (distortion of taste resulting in a
persistent metallic, bitter, sour, sweet, or salty taste).
A. Diagnostic workup of a patient with smell or taste
impairment proves difficult because the complaints are
subjective, thus making objective assessment challenging. Evaluation includes a thorough history (gradual
or acute onset and other associated findings), physical
examination (includes ear, nose, and throat and neurologic examination), and special examination of taste and
smell. Head CT with particular attention to the nasal
cavities, anterior cranial fossa, and nasal sinuses are important in evaluating for anatomic abnormalities. Further imaging studies, such as MRI, are indicated according to the pathophysiologic process suspected. Biopsy of
the olfactory neuroepithelium can be obtained by a
needle and is generally a safe procedure. Biopsy utility
rests in its ability to demonstrate changes that occur
in steroid-dependent anosmia, posttraumatic anosmia,
posttrial olfactory dysfunction, and congenital anosmia.
Medications affecting the sense of smell and taste are
numerous and include opioid analgesics, flunisolide,
promethazine, terbinafine, antibiotics, antifungal agents,
antiinflammatory drugs, cytotoxic agents, cardiovascular
drugs, antiepileptics, psychotropics, nasal decongestants, and antithyroid medications. The true incidence
of drug-induced taste and smell disturbances is likely
higher because of the infrequency of reporting. Druginduced smell and taste disturbances can be minimized
by avoiding the use of drugs known to induce such disturbances in patients with diseases that make them
susceptible to smell and taste disorders. Good nutritional support with zinc supplementation may reduce
the possibility of the onset of drug-induced smell and
taste disorders. Good oral hygiene coupled with prevention of dry mouth may reduce the incidence of
taste disturbances. Once a patient shows signs of such
458

B.

C.

D.

E.

F.

disturbance, an early discontinuation of the offending
drug may prevent complete loss or irreversible distortion of smell or taste.
Congenital anosmia appears to be caused by absence of
olfactory epithelium. The most common congenital
disorder is Kallmann’s syndrome, in which there is
agenesis of the olfactory bulbs in combination with hypogonadism and other developmental abnormalities.
Tumors implicated as causes of anosmia are olfactory
groove meningiomas, frontal lobe gliomas, and pituitary
adenomas with suprasellar extension. Another cause is
a large aneurysm of the anterior cerebral or anterior
communicating artery. Diseases such as chronic rhinitis
and sinusitis or conditions leading to nasal obstruction
are common causes of decreased smell. Anosmia caused
by these conditions is frequently amenable to treatment; if untreated, it may steadily worsen.
Anosmia may occur after even mild head trauma, especially after a blow to the occiput, which causes shearing
of the olfactory filaments as they course through the
cribriform plate. Although there is no treatment for
posttraumatic loss of smell, gradual recovery of smell
function occurs in about one third of patients. The olfactory bulbs and their nerves can be damaged during
subfrontal craniotomy or as the result of a subarachnoid
hemorrhage, meningitis at the base of the skull, or a
frontal lobe abscess. Sudden loss of smell, and sometimes also of taste, may occur after an upper respiratory
infection. This is more common in older patients and is
thought to result from viral damage of the olfactory
mucosa. Recovery, if it occurs at all, may take years.
Dysosmia is common in elderly persons with or without
dementia. In Alzheimer’s disease, there may be deficits
in central processing of smell, rather than a primary
sensory impairment. Uncinate fits, a form of temporal
lobe seizures, consist of brief periods of unpleasant or
foul odor perception, together with an alteration of
consciousness. Gustatory hallucinations may be part of
a temporal lobe seizure and manifestations of other
temporal-parietal dysfunction. The diagnosis can be
confirmed with EEG, and the seizures can be treated
with anticonvulsant medication. Olfactory hallucinations also have been described with illnesses such
as depression, schizophrenia, Alzheimer’s disease, and
alcohol withdrawal.
A unilateral loss of taste on the anterior two thirds of the
tongue can be found in Bell’s palsy and results from involvement of the chorda tympani. Loss of taste as a result
of head injury is less common than loss of smell. It may

459
Patient with DISTURBANCE OF SMELL OR TASTE

A Careful history/examination
Smell disorders

E Dysosmia/

Anosmia

B Lifelong

C Gradual onset

Kallmann’s
syndrome
Meningoencephalocele
Albinism

Anterior fossa
tumor
Aneurysm
Smoking
Medication
Nasal and
paranasal
disease

Taste disorders

parosmia

D Acute onset
Head trauma
Cranial surgery
Subarachnoid
hemorrhage
Base of skull
meningitis
Viral infection

Epileptic activity
Psychiatric illness
Schizophrenia
Endogenous depression
Dementia
Alcohol withdrawal

F Ageusia
Bell’s palsy
Head trauma
Diabetes mellitus

be unilateral or bilateral, presumably caused by damage
to the chorda tympani. Patients with diabetes mellitus
often have a decreased sensation of sweet, bitter, and
sour flavors. This is more common in patients with longstanding diabetes and in those with associated diabetic
neuropathy. Cigarette smoking has been demonstrated
to cause progressive loss of smell in a dose-related manner, with a gradual restoration of smell perception once
patients have stopped smoking. Likewise, chronic alcoholism may lead to dysosmia and dysgeusia.
G. Oral disorders causing taste disturbances include gastroesophageal reflux, oral candidiasis, lichen planus,
leukoplakia, carcinoma of the tongue, and other tongue
afflictions; xerostomia and sialoadenitis; and palatal
clefts and facial hypoplasia. Periodontal disease and
other infectious processes may produce abnormal oral
secretions, resulting in taste changes. Dental restorations or prostheses can give a metallic taste, whereas
dentures may block taste reception.

G Dysgeusia
Oral and dental
disease
Esophageal reflux
Medications
Epileptic activity

References
Arcavi L, Shahar A. Drug-related taste disturbances: emphasis on the
elderly. Harefuah 2003;142(6):446–450, 485, 484.
Comeau TB, Epstein JB, Migas C. Taste and smell dysfunction in
patients receiving chemotherapy: a review of current knowledge.
Support Care Cancer 2001;9(8):575–580.
Doty RL, Bromley SM. Effects of drugs on olfaction and taste. Otolaryngol
Clin North Am 2004;37:1229–1254.
Frye RE, Schwartz BS, Doty RL. Dose-related effects of cigarette smoking on olfactory function. JAMA 1990;263:1233.
Jafek BW, Gordon ASD, Moran DT, et al. Congenital anosmia. Ear Nose
Throat J 1990;69:331.
Jain KK. Drug-Induced Neurologic Disorders, 2nd ed. Göttingen-BernToronto: Hogrefe & Huber, 2001.
Hawkes CH. Disorders of smell and taste. In Samuels MA, Feske SK, eds.
Office Practice of Neurology. Philadelphia: Churchill-Livingstone,
2003:102–120.

