DOMESTIC VIOLENCE

Domestic violence (DV) is a pattern of assaultive and coercive behaviors used in the context of dating or intimate
relationships. This recently recognized problem in medicine affects 8%–12% of U.S. women per year, with lifetime
prevalence approaching 30%. One in nine women seen for
emergency care for any stated reason is actually there because of the acute or chronic effects of DV, and !50% of
all women who seek emergency care have, at some time
in their lives, been victims of DV. Fully one third of all
women who visit emergency facilities for trauma are there
for treatment of injuries caused by DV.
The spectrum of DV includes physical injury, sexual assault, social isolation, verbal abuse, threats, humiliation,
economic deprivation, and restriction of access to transportation and other resources. DV has devastating shortand long-term effects on the life, health, and functioning
of victims, their children, and other dependents. Of abused
persons, 95% are adolescent or adult women in heterosexual relationships; however, DV also occurs in same-sex
relationships and, in a small proportion of cases, by women
perpetrators against male victims. Although women who
are young, poor, and unmarried are most likely to experience DV, the condition affects every age, income level, and
geographic area. Rates of DV are consistent across racial
and ethnic categories when age, income, and education are
controlled for.
Physicians in every specialty and practice setting have
patients who are current, former, or potential victims of
abuse. Asking questions about the possibility of DV must
be done in a compassionate, nonjudgmental manner, preserving the patient’s privacy and focusing on safety and
empowerment. All patients should be routinely screened
for DV in emergency, primary care, and specialty settings.

624

Because of the prevalence, varied presentation, and consequences of DV, core competence in screening, assessment,
and intervention is now part of the standard of care for all
practicing physicians.
A. Taking a careful history is vital to diagnosis and the first
step toward assessment and intervention. Ask every
patient about current or former abuse at the first visit
and periodically thereafter. Because of the high prevalence of DV in the emergency setting, every patient
should be screened at every visit. Ask questions in a
respectful, nonjudgmental manner. Direct questions
usually are best. You can ask, “At any time (or, since I
last saw you) has your partner (or ex-partner) hit,
kicked, or otherwise hurt or frightened you?” Even if
your patient is being abused, she may choose not to
disclose this to you at this time. If your index of suspicion is high, it is acceptable to follow your initial
screening question with, “When I see a patient with an
injury (or illness) such as yours, often it is because
someone has hurt her. Has someone been hurting
you?” Follow-up questions are indicated if the patient
discloses (see E).
B. A careful physical examination with a high index of
suspicion is vital in diagnosing DV. Physical injuries
often are multiple, bilateral, and occur over time; thus
they may be in different stages of healing at the time of
your evaluation. The explanation given for trauma may
be inconsistent with the injury pattern. If this is the
case, use the follow-up question noted in A. Other
suspicious findings include psychological distress (including suicide attempts and substance abuse) and
evidence of sexual assault.
(Continued on page 626)

625
Patient at Risk for DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
(All Patients)

A History
B Physical examination

Denies
(low suspicion)

Denies
(high suspicion)

Rescreen
per routine

Support
Rescreen
frequently

Discloses

Cont’d on p 627

626
C. Begin intervention as soon as the diagnosis of DV
is established. It is crucial to validate and support the
patient, who in all likelihood is fearful and ashamed.
You can say, “I am glad you chose to share this difficult
issue with me,” “I am concerned for your safety and
well-being,” and “Help is available.”
D. Careful documentation is vital to appropriate care.
Record the patient’s statements without bias or judgment. After obtaining the patient’s consent, sketch or
photograph evidence of trauma and include it in the
chart. Include the patient’s face in at least one photo
and a notation of the exact date and time of the photo.
Take follow-up photos if possible. Reporting requirements vary from state to state; thus all documentation
should be undertaken with the patient’s knowledge
and consent and with the patient’s immediate and
long-term safety kept foremost in importance.
E. Risk assessment is also known as lethality assessment.
Nationwide, approximately one third of all women
murder victims whose assailant can be identified have
been killed by a current or former intimate partner.
Thus the patient’s safety is the top priority in evaluation and intervention. Ask the patient, “Has your partner (or ex-partner) ever threatened or tried to kill you
or your children?” “Do you feel you are in danger
now?” “Is it safe for you to return home?” Indicators of
potential lethality include an increase in the frequency
or severity of the abuse, threats of homicide or suicide
by the partner, the availability of a firearm, the abuser’s
knowledge of the victim’s plan to leave or to get help,
and a history of violent criminal behavior by the
abuser.
F. Helping victims learn how to stay safe, defining and
making accessible available resources, and providing
options and referrals are the key interventions in DV.
However, there is no medical magic to offer victims.
Empowerment is vital because disempowerment of
victims is necessary for abusers to maintain the cycle of
abuse. In addition to the validating and supporting
statements suggested in C, convey to the patient that
she deserves better and that the abuse is not her fault.
Make the patient feel that choices and help are available. Offer information such as, “Domestic violence is
common,” “Physical violence is only one part of the
spectrum of domestic violence,” “Domestic violence
often increases in frequency and severity over time,”

and “Services for battered women include, in addition
to shelter, support groups, community outreach, services for children, legal assistance, immigration assistance, and so on.”
G. Necessary medical care, referrals, and follow-up can
be provided in the office setting using posters, pamphlets, and a trusted office staff member or consultant
(e.g., from social work or the local sheltering organization) to ensure follow-up for safety-related issues.
Medical follow-up is also indicated to ensure improving physical and psychological health.
H. Initiate safety planning for every patient who is a victim
of DV. Make the plan in concert with the patient according to the individual’s resources and needs. Components of a safety plan include (1) a “crisis” plan to be
followed in case of emergency, (2) identification of a
safe place to go and a way to get there, and (3) logistical
issues concerning finances, children, and housing. Life
decisions should be made by the victim of DV. Physicians should provide information, support, resources,
and follow-up, but they should not tell the patient what
to do. The victim knows best what needs to take place
to stay alive. The decision may be to remain in the
house with the abuser still present, to remain in the
house and obtain police or judicial assistance to have
the abuser vacate the house, or to leave entirely, to a
known or an undisclosed location. Regardless of the
immediate decisions, the victim’s situation will evolve
over time, as will the readiness to change the situation
and safety plan.
References
Abbott J, Johnson R, Koziol-McLain J, et al. Domestic violence against
women: incidence and prevalence in an emergency department population. JAMA 1995;273:1763.
Alpert EJ. Violence in intimate relationships and the practicing internist:
new “disease” or new agenda? Ann Intern Med 1994;123:774.
Bachman R, Saltzman L. Violence against women: estimates from the
redesigned survey. Washington, DC: US Department of Justice, Office
of Justice Programs, Bureau of Justice Statistics. NCJ-154348, August
1995.
Flitcraft A, Hadley S, et al. Diagnostic and Treatment Guidelines on
Domestic Violence. Chicago: American Medical Association, 1992.
Ganley A. Understanding domestic violence. In Ganley A, Warshaw C,
Salber P, eds. Improving the Health Care Response to Domestic
Violence: A Resource Manual for Health Care Providers. San
Francisco:Family Violence Prevention Fund, 1995:15.
Wilt S, Olson S. Prevalence of domestic violence in the United States.
J Am Med Women’s Assoc 1996;51:77.

627
Patient discloses domestic violence
(Cont’d from p 625)

C Validate and support
D Document findings
E Risk assessment
F Communicate concern
G Information, referrals,
follow-up

H Safety planning

Victim stays
Abuser stays

Victim stays
Abuser leaves

Victim leaves

