A. Many patients complain of dry eyes and dry mouth that is nonpathologic and often changes with ambient humidity. Iatrogenic causes are also more common than inflammatory disease of the salivary and lacrimal glands (Sjögren's syndrome) and should be ruled out. Classes of medications that commonly cause symptoms of ocular and oral dryness (collectively called sicca symptoms) include those with anticholinergic affects (tricyclic antidepressants, older antihistamines), diuretics, and opioids.
B. Suspicion for Sjögren's syndrome is raised by certain elements in the history and physical examination. Ocular dryness is generally severe enough that conventional eyedrops are effective for only 1–2 hours, and patients often have problems with conjunctival irritation and are unable to wear contact lenses. Oral dryness often is severe enough that patients cannot swallow dry foods, such as crackers, without washing them down with liquid. There is often a history of severe dental disease (e.g., dental caries or periodontal disease). Routine examination of the eye is not particularly helpful because conjunctival redness is nonspecific and often absent; lacrimal glands are enlarged, tender, or both in a minority of cases. Examination of the mouth and salivary glands is somewhat more helpful. There may be no pooling of saliva under the tongue, dental caries are common, and salivary glands are more likely to be tender. Female patients with Sjögren's syndrome often suffer from vaginal dryness causing dyspareunia, a point of history that is often obtained only by specific questioning.
C. The majority of patients with Sjögren's syndrome have positive tests for ANAs, anti-Ro/SSA, and anti-La/SSB. The presence of anti-Ro or anti-La antibodies, or both, in the presence of characteristic symptoms is considered by some authorities to obviate more invasive testing.
D. Additional testing is often needed to diagnose Sjögren's syndrome. Tear production can be measured by Schirmen's test, in which a strip of Schirmer filter paper is placed with one end in the conjunctival sac. After 5 minutes, the strip is removed and the length of wetness is measured; <15 mm is abnormal. Slit-lamp examination after topical application of 1% rose bengal solution may demonstrate characteristic corneal or conjunctival damage. Salivary flow can also be measured, but this test is infrequently done. Biopsy of the interior lip to look for lymphocytic infiltration of minor salivary glands is a definitive procedure.
E. A patient diagnosed with Sjögren's syndrome warrants consideration of the presence of another connective tissue disease. Sjögren's syndrome is often a secondary phenomenon in patients with lupus, rheumatoid arthritis, or scleroderma. These diseases can generally be ruled out by history and physical examination, although in a patient who shows any signs of systemic illness, laboratory tests relevant to lupus (antibodies to ds-DNA, RNP, Sm, anti-cardiolipin, and lupus anticoagulant; CBC, BUN, and creatinine; urinalysis) should be considered. The majority of patients with Sjögren's syndrome also have positive results for rheumatoid factor, so this test is not helpful for assessing for superimposed rheumatoid arthritis. In patients without evidence of another systemic rheumatic disease (primary Sjögren's), it is still wise to evaluate organ systems that are often affected in addition to the eyes and mouth. Physical examination of the skin and peripheral nerves and joints is useful. Sjögren's syndrome is associated with lymphocytic infiltrations, which can occur in the kidneys. Therefore, it may be prudent to check for evidence of renal tubular acidosis or interstitial nephritis by urinalysis and urinary electrolytes. Sjögren's syndrome can also evolve into frank lymphoma, and a reasonable vigilance for this eventuality must be maintained. In this respect, quantitative immunoglobulins, CBC with differential, and a search for new lymph nodes may be productive.

