DYSPNEA

Dyspnea is the subjective sensation of shortness of breath,
which may be discomfort or an abnormal awareness of
breathing. Dyspnea can occur as a consequence of increased
work of breathing or when there is stimulation of respiratory
centers in the brainstem or receptors throughout the respiratory system. These receptors are located throughout the
respiratory system, including the upper airway, the alveolar
and interstitial space (juxtacapillary, or J, receptors), the airways, the respiratory muscles, and the chest wall. Dyspnea
is often the most prominent symptom of pulmonary disease,
but it can also be the primary manifestation of nonpulmonary
disorders. Most notably, it is often difficult to distinguish
between pulmonary and cardiac causes of dyspnea.
A. The initial assessment of a patient with dyspnea focuses
on the history. Acute dyspnea should be evaluated
urgently, often in the emergency department. More
chronic dyspnea may be evaluated in a stepwise fashion
in an outpatient setting. Key aspects of the history include smoking history or occupational/environmental
exposures, symptoms associated with the dyspnea, and
triggers of the dyspnea. The words the patient uses to
describe the dyspnea can also be helpful. Common
descriptions include “air hunger,” “chest tightness,” and
“inability to get a full breath.”
B. Physical examination helps guide further diagnostic
studies. Inspection includes observation of pursedlipped breathing (often associated with obstructive lung
disease), the presence of Kussmaul’s respirations (rapid
and deep breaths, usually associated with severe metabolic acidosis), or Cheyne-Stokes respirations (a regularly irregular pattern, commonly seen in congestive
heart failure [CHF]). Clubbing should raise suspicion of
interstitial lung disease, bronchiectasis, or lung cancer.
Cardiac examination can elicit signs of CHF such as
S3, S4, and jugular venous distention. The findings of
crackles, wheezes, or rhonchi also help distinguish
between causes of dyspnea.
C. The first study in the evaluation of dyspnea is often a
chest x-ray (CXR). This study can reveal underlying
changes consistent with CHF, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), or interstitial lung disease. It

488

D.

E.

F.

G.

can also demonstrate pleural effusions, which may have
been suspected based on the physical examination, and
masses, which may have gone undetected. At the same
time, initial studies should include a CBC to assess for
anemia as a cause of dyspnea.
The most common nonpulmonary causes of dyspnea are
cardiac in origin. These include CHF, cardiac ischemia,
arrhythmias, and valvular disease. These different causes
can be better distinguished by ECG, echocardiography,
and possible cardiopulmonary exercise testing. Treatment should be guided by the individual diagnosis.
Other nonpulmonary causes include metabolic derangements and anemia and psychological causes of dyspnea
such as anxiety, panic attacks, or depression. Psychological disorders are always a diagnosis of exclusion.
In a patient with presumed pulmonary disease and
normal CXR, the next step is often pulmonary function
testing (PFT). Initial spirometry can guide further studies, diagnose obstruction (FEV1/FVC !70%), and suggest restrictive physiology. Lung volumes will diagnose
restriction, and additional PFT can help distinguish between interstitial lung disease, neuromuscular weakness,
and results in disorders of the chest wall. The next step
in patients with normal PFT and a normal CXR is
often cardiopulmonary exercise testing and/or echocardiography.
An abnormal CXR usually prompts further radiograph
studies, specifically a chest CT scan. A CT scan can
reveal interstitial fibrosis, emphysema, pleural effusions, mass lesions, and pulmonary emboli. Further
evaluation and therapy are guided by the findings on
CT scan.

References
American Thoracic Society. Dyspnea. Mechanisms, assessment, and
management: a consensus statement. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
1999;159:321.
Braunwald E, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al, eds. Harrison’s Principles
of Internal Medicine, 15th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2001.
Michelson E, Hollrah S. Evaluation of the patient with shortness of
breath: an evidence-based approach. Emerg Med Clin North Am
1999;17:221.

489
Patient with DYSPNEA

A History

Chronic dyspnea

Acute dyspnea

B Physical examination

Urgent evaluation
(often in emergency
department)

C CXR and CBC

Nonpulmonary
causes

Cardiac causes

D

Metabolic causes:
Anemia
Medications
Consider ECG and
Electrolytes
echocardiography
DKA
Abnormal

Normal

Treat underlying
cause

Emphysema

Pulmonary causes

E Psychological

causes:
Anxiety
Depression

Normal

Consider
cardiopulmonary
exercise test

Mass lesion

Abnormal CXR

Normal CXR

F Spirometry

(and other PFT)

G Chest CT scan

Restrictive:
Obstructive:
Parenchymal disease
Asthma
Neuromuscular disease
COPD
Chest wall deformity
Bronchiectasis

Pleural effusion

Pulmonary vascular
disease

Interstitial lung
disease

