DYSPEPSIA

A. Dyspepsia is defined as chronic or recurrent pain or
discomfort centered in the upper abdomen, mainly in or
around the midline as opposed to the right or left hypochondrium (Rome II criteria). Discomfort is characterized by or associated with fullness, early satiety, bloating,
or nausea. Dyspepsia may or may not be related to eating meals. The annual prevalence of recurrent dyspepsia
is approximately 25% over a 3- to 12-month period. If
frequent heartburn is included in dyspeptic symptoms,
the prevalence exceeds 40%.
The physical examination is usually normal except
for mild epigastric tenderness. Examination should assess for GI blood loss, jaundice, abdominal mass or organomegaly, and signs of malabsorption. Screening
laboratory tests include CBC and general biochemistries, including liver function tests and amylase. Additional studies may include stool inspection for parasites,
abdominal radiography (for obstruction, calcifications),
and gastroduodenal motility studies.
Dyspepsia can be caused by a number of disorders.
Functional (idiopathic) dyspepsia, also referred to as
nonulcer dyspepsia, accounts for up to 60% of cases.
Gastroduodenal ulcer disease is found in approximately
15%–25% of patients with dyspepsia but cannot be accurately distinguished from functional dyspepsia based
on the symptom pattern. Atypical gastroesophageal reflux disease accounts for 5%–15% of cases. The presence of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is important to identify because the treatment of this disorder
differs from the treatment of other causes of dyspepsia.
Gastric or esophageal cancer is present in !2% of cases
with dyspepsia. Biliary tract disease is a rare cause of
chronic dyspepsia. Association between gallstones and

186

dyspepsia should be made cautiously to avoid unnecessary cholecystectomy because gallstones may silently
coexist in patients with dyspepsia.
B. NSAIDs can cause dyspepsia, and their use should
be discontinued. Other medications that commonly
cause dyspepsia include potassium supplements, iron,
antibiotics (especially macrolides, sulfonamides, metronidazole), digitalis, corticosteroids, niacin, gemfibrozil, narcotics, colchicine, quinidine, estrogens, and
theophylline.
C. Gastroesophageal malignancy is an uncommon cause
of chronic dyspepsia. In addition to age older than
45–55 years, alarm symptoms such as weight loss, persistent vomiting, dysphagia, anemia, hematemesis, palpable abdominal mass, family history of upper GI
carcinoma, and previous gastric surgery raise the suspicion of gastric malignancy and should lead to prompt
endoscopy. Referral for upper endoscopy is always indicated in older patients presenting with new-onset
dyspepsia.
D. It is recommended that young patients with dyspepsia
without any alarm features undergo a noninvasive Helicobacter pylori test such as H. pylori breath or stool
test. The rationale for testing for H. pylori in patients
with dyspepsia is based on peptic ulcer disease as the
etiology of a minority of cases of chronic dyspepsia. If
H. pylori infection is present, then an empiric trial of
H. pylori eradication treatment is recommended. A
2- to 4-week trial of an antisecretory agent is recommended for patients with negative H. pylori results.
Endoscopy is recommended for all patients whose
symptoms persist or who relapse after empirical
therapy.
(Continued on page 188)

187
Patient with DYSPEPSIA

A Assess symptoms

Heartburn and/or
regurgitation are
presenting complaint,
predominant or frequent

Manage as GERD
(acid suppression)

B NSAID/COX-2
inhibitor use

Dyspepsia without
obvious GERD or
NSAID use

Consider discontinuing
NSAID, switching to
another agent, or
adding a proton pump
inhibitor (PPI)

D Age ! 55 yr

No alarm symptoms

C Age " 55 yr or

Test for H. pylori

alarm symptoms
present

Esophagogastroduodenoscopy
(EGD)

Negative

Positive

PPI trial
4– 6 wk

Treat for
H. pylori

Fails

Fails
PPI trial
4 wk
Fails

Provide reassurance
Reassess diagnosis
Cont’d on p 189

188
E. Patients who fail to respond to empiric therapeutic approaches should also undergo endoscopy. The majority
of patients will be diagnosed as having functional dyspepsia. These patients may respond to reassurance and
if necessary a course of antisecretory or prokinetic
therapy. If symptoms persist, other treatments may
include behavioral therapy, psychotherapy, or antidepressant therapy.
F. Functional dyspepsia, the most common type of dyspepsia encountered in clinical practice, is defined as follows:
at least 12 weeks, which need not be consecutive, within
the preceding 12 months of (1) persistent or recurrent
dyspepsia (pain or discomfort and centered in the upper
abdomen); (2) no evidence of organic disease (including
upper GI endoscopic examination) that is likely to explain symptoms; and (3) no evidence that dyspepsia is

exclusively relieved by defecation or associated with the
onset of a change in stool frequency or stool form (i.e.,
not irritable bowel syndrome [IBS]).
References
Malfertheiner P, Mégraud F, O’Morain C, et al. Current concepts in the
management of Helicobacter pylori infection—The Maasstricht 2-2000
Consensus Report. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2002;16:167.
Ofman JJ, Rabe Neck L. The effectiveness of endoscopy in the management of dyspepsia: a qualitative systematic review. Am J Med
1999;106:335.
Talley NJ, American Gastroenterological Association. American Gastroenterological Association medical position statement: evaluation of
dyspepsia. Gastroenterology 2005;129:1753–1755.
Talley NY, Stanghellini V, Heading RC, et al. Functional gastroduodenal
disorders. Gut 1999;45(suppl 2):II37–II42.

189
Provide reassurance
Reassess diagnosis
(Cont’d from p 187)

E Consider EGD

Abnormal
endoscopic
findings

Biopsies/treatments
based on endoscopic
findings

H. pylori detected

Salvage therapy

F H. pylori—negative functional

dyspepsia (normal endoscopy)
and failed adequate trial of PPI

Normal
endoscopy

Consider:
Rapid urease test
and/or histology
for H. pylori
Culture/sensitivity
testing if previously
treated for H. pylori

Negative
Go to F

Reevaluate the symptoms
and diagnosis
Consider other sources of
abdominal pain:
pancreas, colon, biliary tract
Does the patient have IBS?
Does the patient have panic
disorder or other psychological
issues?

If symptoms persist with no
other cause established,
consider antidepressants,
hypnotherapy, behavior therapy,
prokinetic agents

