ECTOPIC PREGNANCY

Ectopic pregnancies are those implanted outside of the
uterine cavity, the majority of which are in the fallopian
tube. Such a pregnancy may lead to tubal rupture and
intraabdominal hemorrhage and represents the major
cause of maternal death in the first trimester. Early intervention for an ectopic pregnancy may reduce morbidity,
and early suspicion and evaluation are critical. Thus any
reproductive-age woman presenting with abdominal pain,
pelvic pain, hemodynamic instability, or abnormal vaginal
bleeding should have a pregnancy test. If the test is positive, she should be considered to have an ectopic pregnancy
until proved otherwise.
A. A ruptured ectopic pregnancy can lead to catastrophic
intraabdominal hemorrhage. Therefore, the patient’s
initial evaluation should focus on the severity of her
symptoms, vital signs, and abdominal examination.
Young women may lose a large volume of blood before
becoming hypotensive, so any signs of orthostasis
or significant tachycardia should be taken seriously.
Severe abdominal pain, abdominal distention, rebound,
or abdominal guarding should also raise suspicion for
major bleeding. Patients with these findings should be
referred for emergency care and surgical consultation.
B. A stable patient should have a history and physical
examination, with attention paid to the abdominal
examination, assessment of active vaginal bleeding and
cervical dilation, and careful pelvic examination to
evaluate uterine enlargement and presence of an
adnexal mass. Laboratory testing should include a
quantitative serum beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (!-hCG) level, hemoglobin concentration, and
blood type (patients who are Rhesus negative and have
vaginal bleeding should receive Rh immune globulin).
If available, a serum progesterone level can be helpful
as well. All patients should undergo a pelvic ultrasound
(US) examination regardless of the hCG level; even
with a low serum hCG, an adnexal mass or hemoperitoneum may still be visualized.
C. Pelvic US findings may be extremely useful but also
need to be interpreted very carefully. Accurate US diagnosis is highly dependent on the skill of the ultrasonographer, patient habitus, presence of uterine fibroids
or other obstructive lesions, and ability of the patient
to tolerate a vaginal ultrasound probe. An intrauterine
pregnancy is confirmed when one visualizes a gestational sac and embryo surrounded by myometrium,
above the level of the cervix. Similarly, an ectopic pregnancy is confirmed when an indisputable embryo is
viewed outside of the endometrial cavity. Individual
628

ultrasonographers may make one of these diagnoses
with lesser criteria. However, the stakes of misdiagnosis (unnecessary surgery, interruption of a normal
pregnancy, or tubal rupture) are high. Therefore, it is
prudent to discuss the certainty of the US findings with
the sonographer before acting on this information. If
there is any doubt in the diagnosis, further diagnostic
steps should be taken.
D. In the majority of cases, a diagnosis cannot be confirmed with ultrasound alone. At this point one needs
to determine whether this is an abnormal pregnancy
(either intrauterine or ectopic), in which case more
invasive testing can be performed. A normal intrauterine pregnancy may be seen on transvaginal US when
the hCG level is "1500–2000. Again, this will depend
on the skill of the radiologist, the quality of the ultrasound study, and possible variances with the laboratory
assay, so a higher hCG “discriminatory zone” (in the
range of 2000–4000) may be used if there is any doubt
about the findings. The serum progesterone level can
help here as well because a level #5 correlates with an
abnormal pregnancy.
E. If the location of the pregnancy remains unknown
and the gestation is not clearly abnormal, the serum
!-hCG level should be repeated in 48 hours. An increase of #50% or a decrease in the level is indicative
of an abnormal pregnancy. If the hCG level increases
appropriately, the patient should be followed closely
until the level exceeds 2000, at which time the ultrasound is repeated. Patients who wait for further testing
must be pain free and hemodynamically stable and
must be able to return for further testing or emergency
care until the situation is resolved. They must understand and accept the possibility of tubal rupture and
intraabdominal bleeding. Patients who do not meet
these criteria may require hospital admission while
undergoing further evaluation.
F. Once an abnormal pregnancy has been confirmed with
correlation of US and hCG or progesterone levels, the
uterine cavity should be sampled. This is usually
accomplished with dilation and curettage (D&C) of the
uterus or by evacuation with a manual vacuum aspirator
in the office. The removed tissue can be examined both
grossly and microscopically for the presence of trophoblastic tissue or chorionic villi. Such findings confirm that
the abnormal pregnancy was intrauterine. If no products
of conception are identified, the pregnancy is most likely
ectopic and should be treated as such. In some cases
placental tissue can be missed during sampling and
histologic evaluation. In these cases the evacuation

629
Patient with Possible ECTOPIC PREGNANCY

A Stable patient

Hypotension,
tachycardia, orthostasis,
or acute abdomen pain

B Physical examination

Transvaginal US
Quantitative !-hCG
CBC
Blood type and antibody screen
Serum progesterone level

C Definite ectopic

Evaluate for immediate
surgical management

US confirms neither
ectopic pregnancy nor
intrauterine pregnancy
(IUP)

pregnancy on US

D hCG "2000-4000

Definite IUP on US:
ectopic pregnancy
ruled out

hCG #2000
and
Progesterone "5

or
Progesterone #5

E Repeat hCG
in 48 hr

F Abnormal pregnancy:

hCG rises
#50%

perform D&C

hCG falls

Follow level until
less than assay;
if level plateaus,
perform D&C
No placental tissue
on pathology:
ectopic pregnancy
confirmed

hCG rises
"50%
Follow closely until
hCG "2000, then
repeat US

Placental tissue confirmed
on pathology: ectopic
pregnancy ruled out

G Evaluate for medical

versus surgical management
If hCG falls, follow until less
than assay

procedure will be followed by a sharp decrease in serum
hCG level ("15% in 12–24 hours).
G. Once an ectopic pregnancy is confirmed, the patient
must be evaluated for medical or surgical management. The former involves intramuscular methotrexate
injection, whereas the latter may be accomplished via
laparoscopy or laparotomy. The proper treatment
should be determined with the help of a gynecologic
surgeon and after careful counseling of the patient. If
the serum hCG level is decreasing spontaneously, a
patient who is reliable may be followed with serial
hCG levels alone. The ectopic pregnancy is considered
resolved when the serum hCG level is below the
threshold of the assay, which may require weeks of
careful follow-up. If the level plateaus or begins to

increase, the patient must be reevaluated for interventional therapy.

References
Barnhart KT, Sammel MD, Rinaudo PF, et al. Symptomatic patients with
an early viable intrauterine pregnancy: HCG curves redefined. Obstet
Gynecol 2004;104(1):50–55.
Barnhart KT, Simhan H, Kamelle SA. Diagnostic accuracy of ultrasound
above and below the beta-hCG discriminatory zone. Obstet Gynecol
1999;94(4):583–587.
Stovall TG, Ling FW, Carson SA, et al. Serum progesterone and uterine
curettage in differential diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy. Fertil Steril
1992;57(2):456–457.
Stovall TG, Ling FW, Gray LA, et al. Methotrexate treatment of unruptured
ectopic pregnancy: a report of 100 cases. Obstet Gynecol 1991;77(5):
749–753.

