ELEVATED CREATINE KINASE LEVEL

A. Measurement of creatine kinase (CK) is the most common laboratory test used in the evaluation of skeletal
and cardiac muscle disease. It is also often part of routine panel testing and should be considered in the evaluation of elevated transaminases when hepatic causes are
less likely. This chapter focuses on the evaluation of CK
in the workup of musculoskeletal complaints.
B. The initial approach to an elevated CK is a detailed history and physical examination focusing on determining
the origin of CK (e.g., skeletal muscle, cardiac, brain).
This may be readily apparent, as in a patient with acute
chest pain and changes on ECG or with severe proximal muscle weakness.
C. If the cause is not clinically evident, the CK isoenzyme
CK-MB and troponins should be obtained to determine
if the elevated CK is of cardiac origin. CK-MB can be
mildly elevated secondary to regenerating skeletal muscle, and cardiac troponins can be elevated in patients
with myocardial involvement of inflammatory myositis. If
the CK elevation is of cardiac origin, immediately pursue
the appropriate cardiac evaluation and therapy.
D. Occasionally elevated CK levels result from cerebral
causes (i.e., trauma), which are usually readily apparent based on the clinical history.
E. If the CK elevation is from skeletal muscle, the history
should focus on ruling out medications (cholesterollowering agents, colchicine, antimalarials, zidovudine),
drugs and alcohol, trauma, vigorous exercise, dystrophinopathies, inflammatory myopathies, infectious
myopathies, endocrinopathies, and iatrogenic causes
(intramuscular injections, postoperative). The physical
examination should include a complete neurologic
evaluation and musculoskeletal examination, including
muscle strength testing.
F. The laboratory evaluation consisting of a CBC, electrolytes, and thyroid function tests is important to evaluate
the patient for hypothyroidism, electrolyte abnormalities, and infectious causes. These should guide subsequent evaluation and treatment.
G. If the history, physical examination, and laboratory
evaluation do not readily reveal a cause for the elevated
CK, additional evaluation should be pursued. The role
of skeletal muscle MRI is controversial and nonspecific
but may be helpful to identify muscle groups for targeting biopsy. Electromyography (EMG) and nerve
conduction studies (NCS) are useful to distinguish
myopathic and neuropathic alterations. Unilateral
EMG/NCS should be obtained, preserving the contralateral side for muscle biopsy.
H. If the EMG is completely normal, the patient may
be followed closely. However, one must consider
556

I.

J.

K.

L.

M.

false-negative EMG results if clinical suspicion for an
underlying disorder persists. Additional laboratory tests,
ANA, rheumatoid factor, and myositis-specific antibodies (anti-Jo-1, anti-Mi-2, and antisignal recognition
peptide) may be helpful. If the CK elevation persists
or progresses, MRI and/or muscle biopsy should be
considered.
If the EMG demonstrates myopathic changes, a muscle biopsy should be obtained to determine the underlying pathology. If the EMG demonstrates neuropathic
changes, consider additional neurologic evaluation.
A muscle biopsy should be performed on clinically involved muscle on the contralateral side of the EMG to
avoid possible artifact in the biopsy from the EMG
needle. Routine histochemical analysis of biopsy may
be sufficient to make a diagnosis, but special analysis is
often necessary and should be obtained after discussion with the pathologist. If inclusion body myositis is
suspected, the biopsy should be processed for electron
microscopy.
If the muscle biopsy is normal, the patient may be followed closely. However, many muscle diseases are
patchy, and a single biopsy may not detect the involved
site. Therefore, if symptoms persist, a repeat muscle
biopsy or MRI may be required. If symptoms progress,
empiric therapy may be done but with caution.
If the muscle biopsy is consistent with an inflammatory
myopathy, treatment of polymyositis or dermatomyositis consists of corticosteroids and other immunosuppressive medications. Patients with dermatomyositis
should be evaluated for an underlying malignancy.
Patients should also be evaluated for a possible connective tissue disease (CTD), including systemic lupus
erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, or scleroderma.
The diagnosis of inherited and congenital myopathies
often requires special tests on the muscle biopsy.
Treatment is usually symptomatic. The patient should
be evaluated by a neuromuscular specialist.

References
Dalakas MC, Hahlfeld R. Polymyositis and dermatomyositis. Lancet
2003;362(9388):971–982.
Shmerling RH. Diagnostic tests for rheumatic disease: clinic utility revisited. South Med J 2005;98(7):704–711.
Thompson PD, Clarkson P, Karas RH. Stain-associated myopathy. JAMA
2003;289(13):1681–1690.
Warren JD, Blumberg PC, Thompson PD. Rhabdomyolysis: a review.
Muscle Nerve 2002;25(3):332–347.
Wortmann RL. Inflammatory diseases of muscle and other myopathies.
In Harris ED, Budd RC, Firestein GS, et al, eds. Kelley’s Textbook
of Rheumatology, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders, 2005:
1309–1335.

557
Patient with ELEVATED CREATINE KINASE LEVEL

A
B

D

Laboratory tests

Determine origin of
CK based on history
and physical examination

Brain

C

Skeletal muscle

E

Consider CK-BB
Cerebral evaluation

Additional history
and physical
examination

Cardiac

Check CK-MB and
cardiac troponins
Immediate cardiac
evaluation

Positive family
history

History of trauma

Muscle
weakness

Consider treatment
for rhabdomyolysis
and follow CK

Consider:
Inherited
myopathy and
familial
idiopathic
elevated CK

Laboratory evaluation:
CBC, electrolytes (K!,
Ca2!, Mg2!,
phosphate), TSH

G

Muscle
inflammation

EMG/NCS

H

Normal

Follow patient

Persistent or
progressive

J

Normal

M

Positive

Negative

Consider: Hypothyroidism,
electrolyte abnormality,
infection, pyomyositis

Follow patient; if
persists or progressive,
consider further
evaluation

L

Consider MRI
and/or muscle
biopsy

TSH, Thyroid-stimulating hormone.

Neuropathic changes

Consider:
Motor neuron disease
Peripheral neuropathy
Other neurologic disorders

Inflammatory
myositis

Symptomatic treatment
Neurology follow-up
Dermatomyositis

No additional
tests

I

Muscle
biopsy

Inherited congenital
metabolic myopathy

Normal

Laboratory evaluation:
CBC, electrolytes (K!,
Ca2!, Mg2!,
phosphate), TSH

Myopathic changes

Muscle biopsy

Resolution of
symptoms

Discontinue
offending
agent

Negative

MRI

F

Drugs,
alcohol,
medications

Malignancy
evaluation

Polymyositis

Treatment and
evaluate for CTD

Other:
Steroid myopathy
Inclusion body
Myopathy
Sarcoidosis
Vasculitis

