ELEVATED SERUM ALKALINE PHOSPHATASE LEVEL


A. An isolated alkaline phosphatase level is often encountered in asymptomatic patients, although a subsequent
history and physical examination directed at the most
common causes of such elevation often are revealing.
The systems to consider are hepatobiliary and skeletal.
An elevated alkaline phosphatase level is often the
first sign of biliary tract disease in apparently healthy
persons, although symptoms and signs of chronic liver
disease may already be present. Skeletal conditions
associated with elevation of alkaline phosphatase are
usually painful. Serum alkaline phosphatase is also
elevated in pregnancy, primarily as a result of placental production.
B. Additional laboratory tests help determine whether the
elevation is of hepatobiliary origin. Serum gamma glutamyl transferase (GGT or GGPT) and 5'-nucleotidase
(5'-NT) levels are usually also elevated in biliary tract
disease, and other liver function tests (LFTs) may also
be abnormal. The classic procedure of fractionating
alkaline phosphatase by heat stability (“liver lives, bone
burns”) is infrequently performed and not well standardized in many laboratories.
C. Abnormal liver function tests require further workup,
including imaging (ultrasound, CT, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography [ERCP]), viral and
autoimmune serologies, and sometimes liver biopsy.
D. Elevated alkaline phosphatase of suspected skeletal origin should lead to evaluation of the calcium-phosphate
hormonal system, with measurement of serum calcium,
magnesium, phosphate, and 25-OH vitamin D. Elevation of parathyroid hormone (PTH) is unlikely unless
calcium is also elevated, so its measurement is not necessary in the initial series of tests. Lung cancers often
synthesize PTH-related polypeptide (PTHrp), so screening for this protein, and for lung cancer by imaging, is
appropriate in at-risk patients with elevated calcium.
Multiple myeloma is an uncommon cause of an elevated
alkaline phosphatase, so testing of serum and urinary
immunoglobulins for a monoclonal component is not
usually indicated. Patients with significant chronic renal
insufficiency present a special case: it is wise to measure
PTH regardless of the calcium level because PTH
can be markedly elevated even in the presence of
normal or low calcium. It is also a good idea to measure
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D because the kidney is required

554

for the synthesis of this, the most active metabolite of
vitamin D.
E. Elevated calcium and low phosphorus are characteristic of hyperparathyroidism, which should be confirmed
with PTH, PTHrp testing, or both. Osteomalacia is
characterized by normal calcium and low phosphorus.
A vitamin D deficiency severe enough to raise the
alkaline phosphatase level will usually be accompanied
by this decline in phosphorus, regardless of whether
symptoms and radiographic signs (e.g., osteoporosis
and pseudofractures of the long bones around the
knee) of osteomalacia are present. Bone metastases
often increase serum calcium.
F. Paget’s disease of bone features abnormal bone remodeling in sites that vary widely among patients but tend
to remain constant in a patient over time. It is usually
painful, and in some cases deformity is evident. Other
bone diseases to consider in the setting of normal
calcium-phosphate homeostasis include inflammatory
arthritis and a healing fracture, both of which should be
apparent by history and physical examination. As in the
case of elevated calcium, metastases are an important
consideration in the absence of another diagnosis.
G. Plain radiography directed at painful sites should be
the initial imaging test. If these are normal, or if the
patient is asymptomatic, then a radionuclide bone scan
is a sensitive means of evaluating the entire skeleton
for evidence of bone lesions from Paget’s disease, metastases, or other (rare) infiltrative causes. Myeloma
lesions are often invisible by bone scan but, as mentioned earlier, are uncommonly associated with elevated alkaline phosphatase. Any abnormality on bone
scan should be followed by plain radiography or more
advanced imaging (CT, MRI) of the site to assist in
diagnosis.

References
Pratt DS, Kaplan MM. Evaluation of abnormal liver-enzyme results in
asymptomatic patients. N Engl J Med 2000;342:1266–1271.
Reginato AJ, FALASCA GF, Pappu R, et al. Musculoskeletal manifestations of osteomalacia: report of 26 cases and literature review. Semin
Arthritis Rheum 1999;28:287–304.
Whyte MP. Clinical practice: Paget’s disease of bone. N Engl J Med
2006;355:593–600.

555
Patient with ELEVATED SERUM ALKALINE PHOSPHATASE LEVEL

A History

Physical examination

C Biliary origin

B Laboratory tests:

GGT, 5!-NT, other LFTs
Consider fractionation of
alkaline phosphatase

Skeletal origin

D Calcium

Magnesium
Phosphorus
25-OH vitamin D
Consider:
PTH, PTHrp

E Abnormal

F Normal

Osteomalacia
Hyperparathyroidism
Uncertain diagnosis
Consider:
Metastases

Consider:
Paget’s disease
Metastases
Healing fracture
Inflammatory arthritis

G Radiography
Bone scan

