ELEVATED SERUM AMYLASE

A. Amylase is an enzyme with a 55,000-dalton molecular
weight that hydrolyzes starch. The pancreas and salivary
glands contain very high concentrations of amylase.
Amylase also is produced by a number of other organs
in lower concentrations. Approximately 35%–45% of
normal serum amylase is of pancreatic origin. Amylase
has a serum half-life of 1–2 hours. Approximately
20% of circulating amylase is excreted in the urine; the
remainder is catabolized at an unknown site. Increased
serum amylase is most commonly caused by pancreatitis, but hyperamylasemia may be associated with several
other nonpancreatic or nonabdominal disorders with
similar clinical presentations.
B. In acute pancreatitis serum amylase increases within
24–48 hours of the acute onset of pancreatitis. Levels
return to normal within 3–5 days in most cases. A normal serum amylase level occasionally is seen in acute
pancreatitis. This may represent early pancreatitis,
after a transient rise and fall of amylase, extensive pancreatic necrosis with inability to produce amylase, or
cases of acute exacerbation of chronic pancreatitis in
which the gland cannot produce amylase. Serum amylase also may be normal when pancreatitis is associated
with hypertriglyceridemia. In this case, a urinary
amylase measurement usually shows a marked elevation. Cholelithiasis, ethanol, and idiopathic causes are
responsible for about 90% of all cases of acute pancreatitis. Commonly used drugs known to cause pancreatitis include ethanol, hydrochlorothiazide, furosemide,
sulfonamides, tetracyclines, estrogens, valproate, and
azathioprine. A serum amylase level !3 times the upper limit of normal is consistent with pancreatitis.
Other abdominal processes usually do not cause amylase levels !2–2.5 times the upper limit of normal, with
the exception of salivary gland disease and gut perforation or infarction.
C. In acute pancreatitis with persistent elevated serum
amylase levels, complications of acute pancreatitis as
listed should be considered. Abdominal CT is useful in
identifying pseudocysts, abscesses, ascites, and some
tumors: Consider MRI of the pancreas with magnetic
resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) or endoscopic ultrasound (EUS), or consider endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) in pancreatitis
of biliary origin or idiopathic pancreatitis. This would be
of low yield if the CT, MRI, MRCP, and EUS results are
negative.

228

D. In a patient with epigastric pain and elevated serum
amylase, rule out causes other than acute pancreatitis.
In cases of perforated viscus (esophagus, stomach, small
intestine, colon), peritoneal absorption of GI contents
results in elevated serum amylase. The patient usually
has a more abrupt onset of pain and more peritoneal
irritation. Several other nonpancreatic conditions listed
also present with more pronounced signs of peritonitis,
and most need surgical intervention.
E. The elevation of serum amylase in renal insufficiency
usually is modest, seldom !2 times the upper limit of
normal. Macroamylasemia is a condition in which the
major portion of serum amylase is bound to immunoglobin. A (IgA). These macromolecular aggregates cannot undergo glomerular filtration, so the urine amylase
level is low or normal. The amylase/creatinine clearance ratio (ACR) is calculated as follows:
ACR =

A (urine) " CR (serum)
A (serum) " CR (urine)

" 100

where A # amylase concentration and CR # creatinine concentration. In macroamylasemia, the ACR is
abnormally low (usually $0.2%).
F. After the common causes have been considered, more
obscure causes should be sought. Isoamylase or lipase
measurements may be helpful. Elevated serum amylase
secondary to lung disease or certain tumors is commonly of the salivary or s-isoenzyme. Alcoholic patients
may have an elevated serum amylase of salivary origin.

References
Jensen DM, Rayse VL, Newell J, et al. Use of amylase isoenzyme in laboratory evaluation of hyperamylasemia. Dig Dis Sci 1987;32:561.
Magno EP, Chari S. Acute Pancreatitis. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS,
She is enger MH, eds. Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease. 7th ed.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2002:913.
Rabsztyn A, Green PH, Berti I, et al. Macroamylasemia in patients with
celiac disease. AM J Gastroenterol 2001;96:1096–1100.
Ranson JH. Diagnostic standards for acute pancreatitis. World J Surg
1997; 21:136.
Salt WB, Schenker S. Amylase—its significance: a review of the literature. Medicine 1976;55:269.
Tietz NW, Huang WY, Rauh DF, Shuey DF. Laboratory tests in the
differential diagnosis of hyperamylasemia. Clin Chem 1986;32:301.
Toskes PP. Biochemical tests in pancreatic disease. Curr Opin Gastro
1991;7:709.

229
Patient with ELEVATED SERUM AMYLASE

A History

Physical examination

Abdominal pain

No abdominal pain

Diagnostic tests:
Serum lipase
Abdominal
ultrasonography
Plain abdominal
radiography

Diagnostic tests:
Serum creatinine
Urine creatinine
Urine amylase
Isoamylase
measurements

B Acute

pancreatitis

Acute
exacerbation
of chronic
pancreatitis

Consider:
Gallstone pancreatitis
Alcohol induced
Hypertriglyceridemia
Hepatitis
Drug induced
Postoperative
Trauma
Abdominal surgery
ERCP
Blunt trauma
Renal transplantation
Hypercalcemia
Pregnancy

C Persistent amylase

D Nonpancreatic

E Identified cause

intraabdominal condition

Consider:
Pseudocyst
Abscess
Pancreatic ascites
Biliary tract disease
Carcinoma
Pancreas divisum
Treat diagnosed condition

causes

Consider:
Perforated viscus
Mesenteric infarction
Bowel obstruction
Acute appendicitis
Ruptured ectopic pregnancy
Afferent loop syndrome
Dissecting aortic aneurysm
Biliary tract disease
Acute cholecystitis

Acute or
chronic
pancreatitis

Renal
insufficiency

Macroamylasemia

elevation

Diagnostic Tests:
Abdominal
Ultrasonography
Abdominal CT
Scan
MRI of Pancreas
with MRCP
EUS
ERCP

F Obscure

Lung
disease

Malignant
tumors

Consider:
Consider:
Pneumonia
Ovary
Tuberculosis
Prostate
Carcinoma
Lung

Salivary
gland
disease:
Trauma
Infection
(mumps)
Calculus
Radiation
Alcohol

Salivary-type
hyperamylasemia

Other
considerations:
Cerebral
trauma
Burns and
traumatic
shock
Diabetic
ketoacidosis
Anorexia nervosa
Celiac sprue

