EMOTIONAL DISORDERS WITH SOMATIC
EXPRESSION


Patients with emotionally based somatic complaints are
largely unaware of their emotional conflicts. Often labeled
as “crocks,” they receive poor and fragmented treatment,
although their tendency to express their emotional conflicts through somatizing behavior does not immunize
them against bona fide physical illness. Furthermore,
many physical disorders such as thyroid disease, multiple
sclerosis, and temporal lobe epilepsy may initially or primarily present as an emotional disorder, causing delays in
diagnosis and treatment. Physicians can reduce the physical, emotional, and iatrogenic morbidity of patients who
somatize their psychic distress. This can be accomplished
by providing consistency and support through exploring
contributing psychosocial factors, explaining negative test
results, and providing reassurance while minimizing invasive procedures and redundant evaluations. Patients who
somatize are emotionally impaired; rejection serves only to
heighten their impairment.
A. The medical history should include a review for similar, previously undiagnosed disorders in the patient
and family members. Often the somatizing coping
behavior has been modeled or reinforced earlier in
life. Trauma experienced during early emotional development may result in more severe somatoform expression such as a factitious disorder. Personal or family
history also may suggest a proclivity for one of the
major psychiatric disorders.
B. Patients with acute or chronic psychoses may have
bizarre somatic complaints (e.g., they may say that an
alien force has turned their intestines inside out).
Their overall thought disturbance is readily manifest in
their report. It is sometimes difficult to differentiate
between the complaint as a delusion or a symbolic and
personalized interpretation of a genuine physical discomfort. Patients with psychotic depression or monodelusional disorders (e.g., delusions of parasitosis) may
have more focused or fixed somatic concerns that may
or may not diminish when treated with high-potency
antipsychotics such as haloperidol or pimozide.
C. Although patients who are delirious or cognitively impaired may misperceive or fabricate somatic symptoms,
their primary psychiatric problem is differentiated

666

D.

E.

F.

G.

from “functional psychosis” by the presence of periodic
or persistent confusion and disorientation. Antipsychotic medication may decrease the somatic delusions
and behavioral difficulties, but treatment of the underlying disorder may be curative.
Depression may be masked by a complaint of headache
or generalized fatigue. Vegetative signs of depression
may be variably present, along with diminished selfesteem and a depressive affect; these often precede or
coincide with somatic sensations. A primary depression
must be distinguished from a secondary (or reactive)
depression that is a result, not the cause, of a somatic
problem.
Patients with a generalized anxiety disorder may present
with a variety of somatic symptoms such as tachycardia,
motor tension, or autonomic hyperactivity. Patients
with panic attacks may fear cardiac or pulmonary disorders. A primary anxiety disorder needs to be differentiated from a secondary apprehension about a physical
symptom.
A hypochondriacal reaction is distinguished from
classical hypochondriasis in that it follows a clearly
identified recent stressful event, is short-lived, and
responds to reassurance. Examples include an individual who is concerned about minor chest discomfort
after a cardiac-related death of a close friend, a medical student who has a phobia about the “disease of the
day,” and a luncheon crowd’s hysteria in response to
the erroneous report of a victim of food poisoning in
their midst.
Conversion disorder is likely if there is loss or alteration in physical function after a stressful event. The
resultant psychic conflict is not readily apparent to the
individual or evaluator. The diagnosis also requires that
the physical problem cannot be explained by a known
physical disorder. “La belle indifference,” an inappropriate lack of concern for the perceptions by others
of one’s disability, has been widely overstated as a characteristic symptom and is of little diagnostic value. Use
caution when assigning a diagnosis of conversion disorder. Studies show that 13%–30% of patients so diagnosed later develop physical problems that could have
explained their original physical complaint.
(Continued on page 668)

667
Patient with EMOTIONALLY BASED SOMATIC COMPLAINTS
(Previous or Recent Evaluations Are Noncontributory)

A Review medical and psychiatric history
Physical examination

Evidence of major
psychiatric disorder

No evidence
of major
psychiatric
disorder

Bizarre complaints
or behavior

Sensorium
clear

B Consider:

Plausible complaints

D Primary

depression

Sensorium
confused

C Consider:

Acute psychosis
Schizophrenia
Delusional disorder
Psychotic depression
Psychiatric
referral

Delirium
Dementia

Antidepressant
Medication
Trial
Psychiatric
consultation
if no
response

Identify
and treat
underlying
cause

Recent stress

E Primary

anxiety
disorder

Stress management
Relaxation
exercises
Judicious use of
benzodiazepines
or buspirone
trial

No recent stress

Cont’d on p 669

F Reactive

hypochondriasis
Removal
from stress
Emotional
support and
reassurance

G Conversion
disorder

Removal
from stress
Supportive
emotional
and physical
interventions
Positive
suggestion

668
H. Conscious deceit is subdivided into malingering when
secondary gain is apparent and factitious disorder
when reasons for the deceit are not understood by the
patient or the physician. For example, a military draft
inductee who feigns a disorder to avoid conscription is
malingering, whereas patients with factitious disorders
(e.g., Munchausen syndrome) have complex, convoluted reasons for faking somatic disorders, are angry
and emotionally traumatized, have unsettled lives,
and displace hostility onto others. They are difficult
patients to treat both medically and psychiatrically;
confrontation in the absence of a comprehensive medical psychiatric treatment plan rarely works and risks
escalating maladaptive behavior.
I. Hypochondriasis is the misinterpretation of physical
signs or sensations as serious disease. Patients typically
are fearful, do not respond readily to support and
reassurance, return for further evaluation and treatment, or seek other physicians. These patients have
been described as hostile, masochistic, and demanding individuals who deny their needs for dependence;
less commonly, they are described as individuals who
are clinging, passive, and overly dependent in their
relationship with their doctor. Related terms are
somatization disorder, in which patients develop
multiple “review of systems” complaints as an early
life-coping mechanism, and somatoform pain disorder,
when pain is the specific hypochondriacal concern.

J. The absence of a physical finding or inability to establish a physical diagnosis by itself is insufficient for a diagnosis of a major psychiatric or somatoform disorder.
These diagnoses can be made only when the associated
psychiatric characteristics are present and when the
dysfunction and somatic problems are a consequence
of such characteristics. Because life stress or misfortune
is found in most medical patients and nonpatients alike,
take care not to magnify such occurrences when there
is no obvious connection to the physical impairment.
References
Allen LA, Woolfolk RL, Escobar JI, et al. Cognitive-behavioral therapy
for somatization disorder: a randomized controlled trial. Arch Intern
Med 2006;166(14):1512–1518.
Barsky AJ. Hypochondriasis: Medical management and psychiatric
treatment. Psychosomatics 1996;37:48.
Barsky AJ, Stern TA, Greenberg DB, et al. Functional somatic symptoms
and somatoform disorders. In Stern TA, ed. Massachusetts General
Hospital Handbook of General Hospital Psychiatry, 5th ed. St Louis:
Mosby, 2004:269.
Gerdes TT, Noyes R Jr, Kathal RG, et al. Physician recognition of
hypochondriacal patients. Gen Hosp Psychiatr 1996;18:106.
Lipsitt DR, Starcevic V, Franz CP. Psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy
in the treatment of somatoform disorders. Psychiatr Ann 2006;36:
341–348.
Stephenson DT, Price JR. Medically unexplained physical symptoms in
emergency medicine. Emerg Med J 2006;23(8):595–600.

669
Patient with ILL-DEFINED PHYSICAL COMPLAINTS
(previous or recent evaluations are noncontributory)

No recent stress
(Cont’d from p 667)

H Evidence of deceit

Evidence of
secondary
gain

No obvious
secondary
gain

Malingering

Factitious
disorder

Confrontation
Notification
of involved
health
providers

Avoidance of
unnecessary
procedures
Firm but
supportive
management
Psychiatric
consultation

No evidence of deceit

J Undiagnosed
physical
disorder

I Hypochondriasis
or related
disorder

Support and
reassurance
Avoidance of
procedures
or multiple
physician
contacts

