ENCEPHALITIS

Encephalitis should be suspected in patients with acute or
subacute presentations of altered levels of consciousness,
focal neurologic deficits, seizures, or new psychiatric illness
associated with fever and headache. Encephalitis, or meningoencephalitis, is most commonly caused by viral infection but also may be secondary to other infectious agents,
malignancy, or autoimmune processes. The differential
diagnosis includes isolated meningitis, toxic-metabolic encephalopathy, brain abscess or malignancy, vasculitis, and
systemic infection.
A. Define all neurologic deficits, including presence of
meningismus and their duration (acute, lasting hours
to days, and subacute, present for weeks). Identify a
past medical history of HIV or immunosuppression
and travel, animal and insect exposure, sick contact,
vaccine, and sexual history. List all medications and illicit drugs. In addition to a detailed neurologic examination, assess for papilledema and unusual rashes.
B. Evaluate for decompensated renal or liver failure, drug
intoxication, or systemic infection. Although these findings may provide an alternative diagnosis, they do not

preclude thorough evaluation for encephalitis. HIV testing should be performed for subacute presentations.
C. Obtain a CT scan of the head if there are focal neurologic abnormalities, papilledema, severely depressed
levels of arousal, or seizures or if the patient is immunosuppressed. The CT results will help exclude brain
edema and risk of herniation potentially requiring corticosteroids and neurosurgical consultation.
D. Perform lumbar puncture and send cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF) for protein, glucose, cell count and differential,
Gram stain and bacterial cultures, herpes simplex virus
(HSV) types 1 and 2, and varicella-zoster virus polymerase chain reaction (VZV PCR). If the presentation
is subacute or there is immunosuppression or HIV,
obtain CSF fungal and acid-fast bacillus (AFB) stains
and culture, VDRL and PCR for JC virus, human herpes virus (HHV) type 6, cytomegalovirus (CMV), and
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Depending on the time of
the year, exposures, and geographic location, testing is
indicated for arboviruses (West Nile, Eastern and Western Equine, and St. Louis encephalitides), enteroviruses, or other pathogens (Table 1). These tests include

Table 1 Infectious Causes of Encephalitis

Clinical History
Lack of Childhood Vaccines
Travel:
1. Africa
2. Asia
3. South America
4. Europe
5. North America
Rodent exposure, transplant
Animal bite, bats, transplant
Tick bite, woodland exposure
Season:
1. Summer/fall
2. Winter/spring

Pathogen*

Testing

Measles, mumps, polio
Any tropics: Dengue [malaria]
1. West Nile [trypanosomiasis]
2. Japanese encephalitis virus
3. Venezuelan equine encephalitis
4. Tick-borne encephalitis
5. St. Louis, La Crosse (Midwest), Eastern and Western
Equine, West Nile (throughout United States)
LCMV
Rabies
Colorado tick-bite fever
[Lyme disease, Rocky Mountain spotted fever]

Measles, mumps serology
Thick and thin blood smear to rule out malaria, dengue
serum ELISA, and serum ELISA for specific arboviruses
(acute and convalescent) and CSF PCR if available

1. Enterovirus (coxsackie, echovirus), arbovirus
(West Nile, St. Louis, Eastern/Western Equine)

1. CSF, stool and throat PCR and culture for enteroviruses; serum ELISA for arboviruses, and CSF PCR
if available
2. Serology for mumps and measles, and nasal washings for influenza
Nasal washings for respiratory virus

2. Measles, mumps, influenza

Preceding URI

Influenza, adenovirus, mycoplasma

Physical Finding
Vesicular rash
Parotitis, pancreatitis, orchitis
Flaccid paralysis
Pneumonia

HSV-1/2, varicella
Mumps
West Nile
Mycoplasma, respiratory virus, [pneumococcus]

Serology
Blood and CSF serology, saliva PCR
Serology for CTBF [Lyme ELISA and Western Blot,
RMSF serology]

Direct fluorescent antibody, culture
Serology
Serology and CSF PCR
Mycoplasma throat and CSF PCR,
Mycoplasma acute/convalescent serology
Nasal washings for respiratory virus

*Infections that mimic are in brackets.

310

(Continued on page 312)

311
Patient with ENCEPHALITIS
Fever or headache concomitant
with seizures, unusual behavior,
or other CNS deficit

A History and

physical examination

B Liver and renal function,
toxicology, CBC,
blood cultures

Focal neurologic
deficit, seizure,
coma?

No

D Lumbar puncture:

Gram stain, bacterial
culture, HSV-1/2, VZV PCR

Cont’d on p 313

Yes

C Head CT
Impending
herniation?
Neurosurgical
consultation,
steroids

312
virus-specific IgM/IgG enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA) of sera, and CSF PCR.
E. Start empiric IV acyclovir 10 mg/kg every 8 hours immediately after the lumbar puncture (adjusted for renal
function). If the presentation is acute or includes meningismus, start therapy for bacterial meningitis. Although a low CSF glucose (!50 mg/dl), high CSF
protein ("250 mg/dl), or a cell count "1000 with a
neutrophilic predominance suggests bacterial meningitis, early viral encephalitis may present with a neutrophilic pleocytosis and early bacterial meningitis may
show a lymphocytic predominance. A CSF WBC count
of !5 argues against encephalitis, but if suspicion is
high, repeat the lumbar puncture in 24–48 hours. If the
lumbar puncture, Gram stain, or culture reveal organisms, tailor therapy accordingly. If CSF bacterial culture results are negative at 48 hours, stop antibiotics
but continue acyclovir.
F. If no etiology is apparent from initial CSF stains, proceed to MRI of the brain. Leptomeningeal enhancement is a nonspecific finding in meningoencephalitis.
Arboviral infection may cause diffuse parenchymal T2
hyperintensity or may center on the brainstem, as may
Listeria or enteroviruses, whereas HSV often has a
predilection for the temporal lobes. White matter–centric T2 hyperintensity often reflects HIV or JC virus
infection, in contrast to the focal space-occupying lesions found in toxoplasmosis, abscesses, or malignancy.
An EEG is useful in patients with seizures; temporal
lobe activity suggests HSV or other herpes viruses.
If no diagnosis is made after initial lumbar puncture
and imaging, consider repeat lumbar puncture after

48 hours and send for HSV PCR and viral studies not
obtained initially. Focal lesions on MRI warrant stereotactic brain biopsy if the patient does not respond to
empiric therapy and the diagnosis is uncertain.
G. If CSF PCR is positive for HSV or VZV, continue acyclovir for 14–21 days. If other herpes family viruses
are isolated, specific therapy should be initiated with
the guidance of an infectious disease specialist. If
MRI findings suggest PML or HIV encephalopathy in
a patient with HIV, start antiretroviral therapy. For
most other causes of viral encephalitis, treatment is
supportive, although an experimental protocol has
been successful for rabies. If no etiology is evident
but the clinical syndrome is highly suggestive of
encephalitis, continue acyclovir for presumptive HSV
for 14–21 days, unless two separate CSF HSV PCR
results 48 hours apart are negative.
H. If an exhaustive infectious evaluation is negative, or if
the patient has a past medical history of malignancy,
vasculitis, or connective tissue disorder, evaluate for
noninfectious etiologies for encephalitis.
References
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Information on arboviral
encephalitides. Available at: www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dvbid/arbor/arbdet.
htm. Accessed June 12, 2009.
Foerster BR, Thurnher MM, Malani PN, et al. Intracranial infections:
clinical and imaging characteristics. Acta Radiol 2007;48:875–893.
Mandell G, Bennett J, Dolin R, eds. Principles and Practice of Infectious
Diseases, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2007.
Solomon T, Hart I, Beeching NK. Viral encephalitis: a clinician’s guide.
Pract Neurol 2007;7:288–305.

313
Patient with ENCEPHALITIS
(Cont’d from p 311)

Acute presentation
or meningismus

E Acyclovir

No diagnosis

Subacute course,
HIV, immunosuppressed
CSF also for:
Fungal and AFB stain/culture
VDRL
PCR for JC virus, CMV, EBV, HHV-6

Therapy for bacterial
meningitis
Gram stain or
culture positive for
microorganisms

CSF study or
serology positive

F MRI of brain

Continue appropriate
antimicrobial therapy

Treat appropriately or
supportive management

Space-occupying
lesion

White matter disease,
HIV positive

Evaluate for toxoplasmosis,
abscess, or malignancy

Antiretrovirals,
assess for PML

No improvement,
no diagnosis

Brain biopsy

Diffuse or focal T2
parenchymal abnormality,
and CSF PCR and
serologies nondiagnostic

G Repeat lumbar puncture
Complete 14–21
days of acyclovir

No improvement,
no diagnosis

H Evaluate for noninfectious etiologies of

encephalitis (paraneoplastic, connective
tissue disease, vasculitis)

