EVALUATION OF ADVERSE DRUG REACTIONS

A. An adverse drug reaction (ADR) is any unexpected,
unintended, undesired, or excessive response to a
drug or medication that (1) requires discontinuing the
medication; (2) requires changing the medication;
(3) requires modifying the dosage; (4) necessitates
hospital admission; (5) prolongs stay in a health care
facility; (6) necessitates supportive treatment; (7) significantly complicates diagnosis; (8) negatively affects
prognosis; or (9) results in temporary or permanent
harm, disability, or death. The concept of medication
misadventures includes medication errors and ADRs.
ADRs are far more common than many clinicians believe. A recent meta-analysis of 39 prospective studies
concluded that serious ADRs occur in 6.7% of hospitalized patients, with a fatality rate of 0.32%. Annually,
2.2 million hospitalized patients experience serious ADRs,
with 106,000 deaths per year, making ADRs the fourth
leading cause of death in the United States. The elderly
are especially prone to ADRs. Approximately 5% of hospitalizations result from an ADR. It is estimated that 11%
of hospitalized patients experience an ADR, with 2.1% of
those considered serious. Many ADRs are preventable.
B. Evaluate any patient receiving a pharmacologically active
substance (including diagnostic agents and alternative
products) who has any adverse event for a possible ADR.
Medication errors, including improper prescribing, dispensing, or administration of a drug, are one possible
cause of ADRs. Standard drug information resources can
help define the adverse effect profile of a given agent.
However, information regarding newly marketed agents
may be difficult to obtain.
C. Establishing a temporal association is often the most difficult part of the evaluation. Most ADRs manifest within
the first day or two of treatment and most by the second
week of therapy. The temporal relationship is drug, patient, and reaction specific. To establish a clear-cut temporal relationship, compare the time of onset of the reaction with that expected based on previous reported
reaction or the known or proposed pathophysiologic
mechanism. If the reaction has not been seen with the
suspected drug, compare similar agents or drugs within
the same class. Take into account patient specificity (e.g.,
type I hypersensitivity reactions may be immediate in
nature in a patient who was previously exposed or delayed
5–10 days in a patient who has never been exposed).
D. Discontinue all potential offending agents, if possible.
However, the decision to discontinue agents depends
698

E.

F.

G.

H.

on the severity of the reaction, the effectiveness of the
agent, the need for continued therapy, and the availability
of therapeutic alternatives. If an alternative agent is used,
choose one that is unlikely to cause the same ADR.
Like the onset of a reaction, resolution varies according to the specific nature of the reaction and the
patient. Be aware that some adverse reactions, such as
ototoxicity from aminoglycosides or nephrotoxicity
from amphotericin B, may resolve only after long
periods or may have permanent sequelae.
Rechallenge should not be undertaken unless the
benefits outweigh the risks and should not be used
merely to confirm the association between the ADR
and the suspected drug. Be aware that there may be a
different manifestation of the adverse reaction on
rechallenge, particularly in cases of allergic reactions.
These changes may be in the temporal relationship or
in the severity of the reaction.
A variety of protocols are available to formally assess the
probability and severity of an ADR. Unless the cause of
the reaction is common and unambiguous, it may be
helpful to apply one of these assessment protocols to the
patient situation.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) MedWatch program is a voluntary system to report adverse
events and products problems. The FDA is especially
interested in serious or unusual reactions, reactions to
new drugs, and reactions to herbal and other alternative
medicine products. MedWatch reports can be submitted by fax (1-800-FDA-0178), by mail, or on-line (www.
fda.gov/medwatch/). Vaccine-related ADRs should be
reported to the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS) at 1-800-822-7967.

References
American Society of Health-System Pharmacists. ASHP Guidelines on
adverse drug reaction reporting and monitoring. Am J Health-Syst
Pharm 1995;52:417–419.
Ayaji FO, Sun H, Perry J. Adverse drug reactions: a review of relevant
factors. J Clin Pharmacol 2000;40:1093–1101.
Lazarou J, Pomeranz BH, Corey PN. Incidence of adverse drug reactions
in hospitalized patients: a meta-analysis of prospective studies. JAMA
1998;279:1200.
Naranjo CA, Busto U, Sellers EM, et al. A method for estimating the
probability of adverse drug reactions. Clin Pharmacol Ther
1981;30:239.
Thurmann PA. Methods and systems to detect adverse drug reactions in
hospitals. Drug Saf 2001;24:961–968.

699
Awareness of Possible ADVERSE DRUG REACTIONS (ADRs)

A Monitor all patients receiving

pharmacologically active agents

B Patient with possible ADR
Consider:
Medication error
Patient-specific data

Published literature
supports possible ADR

C Temporal association

No temporal association
with use of drug

with use of drug

Causal relationship
doubtful

Possible offending
agent not
discontinued

D Possible offending

agent discontinued

E ADR resolves

F Rechallenge

ADR
reappears
Causal
relationship
definite

No rechallenge

ADR
does
not
reappear
Causal
relationship
possible

ADR
does
not
resolve

ADR
does
not
resolve

ADR may
be caused
by existing
clinical
condition
and/or
No previous
report of
ADR
associated
with drug

ADR unlikely
to be caused
by existing
clinical
condition
or
Previous
report of
ADR
associated
with drug

Causal
relationship
doubtful

Causal
relationship
possible

H Consider reporting
to FDA MedWatch
program

ADR resolves

G Causal

relationship
doubtful

