EVALUATION OF A NEW DIAGNOSIS OF CONGESTIVE HEART FAILURE


Heart failure (HF) is a significant cause of morbidity and
mortality in the United States. It is estimated that 5 million
patients currently have HF and approximately 550,000 patients are newly diagnosed each year. Early diagnosis and
treatment of underlying and potentially reversible causes
are essential to preventing the progression to more severe
and debilitating symptoms.
A. The history and physical examination should focus
on distinguishing between ischemic causes of HF (coronary artery disease [CAD]) and nonischemic causes of
HF (valvular heart disease, diabetes, hypertension, alcohol abuse, neuromuscular disorders, and cardiomyopathies). The family history should be explored for premature CAD, HF, arrhythmias, and sudden cardiac death.
The baseline ECG should be reviewed for evidence of
myocardial infarction, conduction disturbances, and arrhythmias.
B. Approximately 40%–60% of patients with HF have
evidence of CAD. Patients with angina and/or clinical
suspicion for CAD should be referred for cardiac catheterization. Noninvasive testing for ischemia can also
be considered, but cardiac catheterization should be
performed in any patient in whom the diagnosis of
CAD remains uncertain after noninvasive testing.
C. If CAD and ischemia are found, mechanical revascularization should be strongly considered. If left ventricular
(LV) function is abnormal (i.e., ejection fraction [EF]
!40%), then an assessment of myocardial viability
should be performed. If viability is adequate, mechanical revascularization should be performed if the patient
is otherwise a medically appropriate candidate.
D. Echocardiography is used to make the important clinical
distinction between HF with either normal or abnormal
systolic function and to assess valvular abnormalities,
right-sided heart function, and chamber dimensions.
E. Primary anatomic abnormalities of valve structure
(i.e., myxomatous mitral valve, bicuspid aortic valve)
suggest HF is a result of valvular heart disease. Other
causes include rheumatic heart disease, connective tissue disorders such as Marfan’s syndrome, or calcific
degeneration. When HF is secondary to significant primary valvular disease, referral for surgical intervention
should be considered.
F. In patients with HF and nonischemic LV dysfunction,
there are multiple other causes to consider. History
should be specifically sought for drug and alcohol use,
recent viral illness, and familial disorders. Systolic
82

dysfunction can result from exposure to certain drugs
(i.e., anthracyclines, trastuzumab, and cyclophosphamide) through hypersensitivity reactions by direct myocardial injury. Incessant atrial and ventricular tachycardias may also lead to nonischemic cardiomyopathies.
Endomyocardial biopsy is required to establish the diagnosis of myocarditis. Many patients (20%–30%) will not
have a definitive diagnosis despite extensive investigations and will be diagnosed with idiopathic cardiomyopathy. It is believed that many of these patients have either
a familial disorder or a postviral etiology.
G. There are numerous causes of HF with preserved systolic function (also known as “diastolic heart failure”).
This diagnosis is generally considered when the EF is
"40%. Many of these patients will also exhibit abnormal diastolic function. Patients at risk for this type of
HF are generally elderly females with diabetes and
are hypertensive on presentation. In the absence of
hypertension, restrictive cardiomyopathies should be
considered. These disorders include infiltrative diseases (amyloid, sarcoid, and hemochromatosis), inherited myocardial diseases (hypertrophic cardiomyopathy), and radiation injury. Although the echocardiogram
may have suggestive findings, cardiac biopsy is often
necessary to diagnose infiltrative cardiomyopathies.
Finally, constrictive pericardial disease should always
be ruled out.
H. All patients with HF should have basic biochemical
testing to look for renal dysfunction, anemia, electrolyte imbalances and thyroid dysfunction because
these may contribute to HF symptoms and progression. Specific testing can assist in the diagnosis of
hemochromatosis and amyloidosis. A cardiac biopsy
may be useful in patients with acute myocarditis or if
there is strong clinical suspicion of an infiltrative
cardiomyopathy.

References
Chareonthaitawee P, Gersh BJ, Araoz PA, Gibbons RJ. Revascularization
in severe left ventricular dysfunction: the role of viability testing. J Am
Coll Cardiol 2005;46(4):567–574.
Fang J, Eisenhauer. Profiles in heart failure. In Baim DS, ed. Grossman’s
Cardiac Catheterization, Angiography, and Intervention. Philadelphia:
Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, 2005.
Felker GM, Thompson RE, Hare JM, et al. Underlying causes and longterm survival in patients with initially unexplained cardiomyopathy.
N Engl J Med 2000;342(15):1077–1084.

83
Patient with CONGESTIVE HEART FAILURE

A Medical history

Physical examination
ECG
Suspect nonischemic causes

Suspect ischemic
heart disease

B

D

Cardiac catheterization or
noninvasive test for ischemia

E

Evidence of significant
ischemia?

Yes

No

Echocardiography

Primary valve disease?

Yes

No

Surgery

C

Assessment of
LV function
Preserved systolic function

Systolic dysfunction
LVEF !40%

LVEF "40%

Viability present?

Revascularization

Yes

No

Revascularization

Medical therapy

F

Potential causes:
Familial
Viral
Alcohol
Tachycardia-induced
Cardiotoxic exposures
Idiopathic

H

G

Potential causes:
Hypertensive heart disease
Restrictive cardiomyopathy
Amyloid
Sarcoid
Radiation
Hemochromatosis
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Pericardial disease
Not HF

Laboratory testing to
investigate underlying causes
and assess comorbidities
Consider:
Heart biopsy
Management of HF and
treatment of underlying
cause if applicable

Fox KF, Cowie MR, Wood DA, et al. Coronary artery disease as the
cause of incident heart failure in the population. Eur Heart J
2001;22(3):228–236.
Hunt SA, Abraham WT, Chin MH, et al. ACC/AHA 2005 guideline update for the diagnosis and management of chronic heart failure in the
adult: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart

Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Writing Committee to
Update the 2001 Guidelines for the Evaluation and Management of
Heart Failure): developed in collaboration with the American College
of Chest Physicians and the International Society for Heart and Lung
Transplantation: endorsed by the Heart Rhythm Society. Circulation
2005;112(12):e154–235

