FALLS IN GERIATRIC PATIENTS

Traditional medicine has viewed falls as the functional
outcome of a primary medical condition. Medical conditions are worked up and ruled out; however, the reason for the fall often remains unexplained. With the
aging of the population and the increased risk of falls
with aging, geriatric medicine has embraced falls as a
geriatric syndrome with a multiplicity of causes warranting careful analysis. With the cause suspected, therapeutic and preventive measures can be undertaken to prevent
recurrence. Falls are associated with a subsequent
decline in functional status, greater likelihood of nursing
home placement, increased use of medical services, and a
fear of falling in the individual.
The fall evaluation demands diligence and attention to
detail, lending itself to an algorithmic approach. It includes
a comprehensive history and physical examination, which
can lead to a differential of causes, commonly multifactorial. Management interventions are then possible.
A. The fall history takes into account that falls are underreported. Knowing this, clinicians should ask about
falls annually in the context of functional assessment
and should establish the individual’s baseline level of
gait, balance, and use of assistive walking devices.
Reported falls should be explored more fully by determining frequency (single or recurrent) and severity
(minor injury such as soft tissue injury/sprain or major
injury such as laceration requiring sutures, fractures,
or head strike). The detail of the fall should be elicited
in a systematic way from the faller or a witness. Distinguishing loss of consciousness, or not, is a critical
feature, and the former should lead to a syncope
workup. With no loss of consciousness there should be
further differentiation into dizziness, or not, similarly
leading to a “dizziness” workup where appropriate.
Medication history, including over-the-counter and
herbal medicines, and a history for environmental
hazards, such as throw rugs, are key. Remember that
most falls are multifactorial in origin.
B. A comprehensive physical examination includes vision,
HEENT (head, eyes, ears, nose, and throat), cardiovascular, neurologic, musculoskeletal, gait/balance, and
a heightened focus on any other areas suggested by the
history. Vital signs should include orthostatic measurements of pulse and blood pressure, and pain should be

48

assessed as the “fifth vital sign.” The systematic traditional examination should include an assessment of
ambulation using a functional status tool such as the
“Tinetti Gait and Balance” test or the timed “Get Up
and Go” test.
C. There are many causes for falls, and usually many
factors play a role.
1. Normal age-related changes, including declines in
the following:
a. Visual, proprioceptive, and vestibular systems,
which are necessary to maintain upright posture
b. Postural control manifested by increased postural sway
c. Autoregulatory mechanisms, which help to maintain blood pressure
d. Total body water, increasing the risk of dehydration and hypotension
2. Acute medical conditions, which undermine any
already-compromised reserve
3. Lifetime accumulation of chronic medical conditions, especially ophthalmologic, ENT (ear, nose,
and throat), cardiovascular, neurologic, rheumatologic, and orthopedic
4. Medications, including cardiac drugs, psychotropics,
hypoglycemic agents, alcohol, and anticholinergics/
antihistamines
5. Environmental hazards
6. Risk-taking behavior
7. Trip, slip, stumble, or loss-of-balance accident
D. Management interventions address likely reasons for the
fall. These include treatment of acute and chronic medical conditions, medication modification, environmental
hazard modification, risk-taking behavior modification,
and gait/balance/exercise programs (which additionally
address the need for proper footwear and assistive
walking devices).
References
Kiel DP. Falls. In Cobbs EL, Duthie EH, Murphy JB, eds. Geriatrics Review
Syllabus, 5th ed. New York: Blackwell Publishing, 2002–2004.
Podiasdlo D, Richardson S. The timed “Up & Go”: a test of basic
functional mobility for frail elderly persons. J Am Geriatr Soc
1991;39:142–148.
Tinetti M. Performance oriented assessment of mobility problems in
elderly patients. J Am Geriatr Soc 1986;14:61–65.

49
Patient with FALLS

A History
Reported

Unreported

Ask about the details of the fall:
Single
Recurent
With/without injury

Ask about falls in the
context of annual
functional assessment

Establish baseline level
of gait, balance, and use
of assistive devices

None
Establish baseline level
of gait, balance, and use
of assistive devices

Consider emerging causes

Witnessed

Unwitnessed

Question witness(es)

Question patient/surrogate

Loss of consciousness

No loss of consciousness
Dizziness

Physical examination

Syncope workup
and consider
other causes

Functional:
“Tinetti Gait and Balance” test
Timed “Get Up and Go” test

No dizziness

Dizziness workup Other causes:
and consider
Acute medical conditions
other causes
Chronic medical conditions
Medications
Environmental hazards
Risk-taking behavior
Trip, slip, stumble, lossof-balance accident

B Physical examination:

Vital signs: Orthostatic BPIP, T, Pain
HEENT: Vision, hearing, nystagmus
Neck: ROM, motion-induced vertigo, bruit
Back: Kyphosis, scoliosis
Cardio/pulmonary: CHF, arrhythmia, murmur
Extremities: Arthritis, ROM, deformity, feet
Musculoskeletal: ROM
Neurologic: Mental status, tremor, rigidity, weakness, neuropathy
Functional: “Tinetti Gait and Balance” test, timed “Get Up and Go” test

C Causes:

Syncope
Dizziness
Other causes

D Management interventions:

Treat acute medical conditions
Treat chronic medical conditions
Medication modification
Environmental hazard modification
Risk-taking behavior modification
Gait, balance, exercise programs
Footwear, assistive devices

ROM, range of motion

