FATIGUE

Acute (!6 months’ duration) and chronic ("6 months’
duration) fatigue are associated with many diseases, but
most patients have signs and symptoms of the primary disease process. In a large urban internal medicine practice,
25% of patients admitted to at least 1 month of fatigue that
interfered with their daily activities and 11%–12% of patients in two other series had chronic fatigue. Fatigue is the
chief complaint in 1%–7% of office visits by adults. Acute
fatigue is more likely than chronic fatigue to be associated
with a clear-cut cause or to resolve spontaneously.
A. Although 75% of patients with a chief complaint of
chronic fatigue have a psychiatric diagnosis and 20%
have no definable diagnosis, about 7% have significant
physical disease (4% have both medical and psychiatric
disease, and 3% have only a medical diagnosis). Because fatigue is so nonspecific, a careful history and
physical are essential and should include a description
of the fatigue (e.g., is it exhaustion, breathlessness, lack
of interest?), precipitating and palliative factors (is it
related to work, less on vacations or weekends, affected
by bed rest, onset, relationship to activities?), and any
associated physical or psychological symptoms.
B. Physiologic fatigue results from a situation that would
cause most people to become fatigued. It is common
in sleep-deprived new parents, working mothers of
toddlers, and workers doing rotating shifts or overtime,
but it also can result from overtraining in athletes,
malnutrition, and exposure to high noise levels. Rest,
improved scheduling, and/or ear protection usually
resolve the fatigue. Boring, low-paying jobs are more
likely to be experienced as fatiguing than are more
stimulating jobs, especially if they involve low levels of
physical activity (perhaps they fall below the level
needed to maintain arousal).
C. Consider drugs or toxins (alcohol, illicit drugs, sedating
medications such as antihistamines, beta blockers, or
nonsteroidals, including over-the-counter and herbal
medications, and occupational toxin exposures). Neurologic disease (e.g., multiple sclerosis, Parkinson’s disease, postpolio, seizures), and medical disease can cause
fatigue. Adrenal insufficiency may present as fatigue but
usually is associated with orthostatic hypotension. Hypothyroidism, hypopituitarism, asthma, sarcoidosis, anemia, lupus, hepatitis, chronic infections, and malignancy
have all been identified in case series. Many illnesses
produce severe fatigue, but usually other symptoms are
more prominent (e.g., heart failure, tuberculosis).
6

D. Unless another cause of the fatigue is obvious on initial
evaluation, carefully question all patients with fatigue
for risk factors for HIV, syphilis, and hepatitis B and C,
all of which can present as isolated fatigue.
E. Lyme disease occurs in temperate wooded climates.
Coccidioidomycosis is caused by a fungus endemic in
the desert southwest and can be acquired with brief
exposure, such as driving through the area. Both illnesses may present as isolated fatigue.
F. Fibromyalgia affects about 3% of adult women in the
general population and is characterized by aching
muscles both above and below the waist, multiple tender points, and the absence of other disease to explain
the symptoms. Although the American Rheumatologic
Association criteria require 11 tender points of 18
tested, population studies show a spectrum of symptoms with aching muscles and increasing numbers of
tender points being correlated with sleep disturbance,
fatigue, and depression. Up to 70% of patients who
meet criteria for chronic fatigue syndrome (Figure 1)
also meet criteria for fibromyalgia. Because other
rheumatologic conditions may cause similar symptoms,
add a careful joint and skin examination as well as
screening rheumatologic laboratory testing (creatine
phosphokinase [CPK], C-reactive protein [CRP], ANA,
and rheumatoid factor [RF]) to the usual laboratory
evaluation of fatigue when fibromyalgia is suspected.
G. Because most patients with a presenting symptom of
fatigue have a psychiatric diagnosis, perform a careful
psychosocial assessment (Table 1). Because few of
these patients think that their symptoms are psychiatric

Table 1 Areas of Psychosocial Assessment
for Symptoms of Fatigue
Historical data
Work history
Past or current substance
abuse
Addictive behavior patterns
Depression, anxiety, or other
psychiatric diagnosis
Abuse (physical, sexual, emotional)
Family history of chronic health
problems
Significant life changes or losses

Current functioning
Current work experience
Quality of relationships or support
networks
Sexual activity and function
Appetite and diet
Life goals
Self-esteem
Exercise or recreational activities
Coping skills
Relaxation techniques

From Ruffin MT, Cohen M. Evaluation and management of fatigue. Am
Fam Physician 1994;50:625, as adapted from Holmes GP. Defining the
chronic fatigue syndrome. Rev Infect Dis 1991;13(Suppl 1):S53.

7
Patient with FATIGUE

A History, including

careful description
of fatigue
Physical examination

B Evidence of

physiologic fatigue

E Geographic
risk factors

D Risk factor for

sexually transmitted
or bloodborne disease

C Chronic medical

disease or exposure
identified

Treat Underlying
Cause of Persistent
Fatigue

Test for Lyme
disease or
coccidioidomycosis

Testing for HIV, syphilis,
and hepatitis B and C

Treat Abnormal
Results

F Findings consistent

No specific
medical illness
identified

with fibromyalgia

Daytime hypersomnolence, snoring,
or other symptoms
of sleep apnea
Refer for
sleep disorders
evaluation

Normal
results

Normal
results

Disease-Specific
Testing and
Treatment

Fatigue
resolved

CPK, CRP,
ANA, RF

Abnormal
results
Evaluate
for specific
illness

Fatigue
persists

Laboratory evaluation:
CBC, thyroid-stimulating
hormone, electrolytes,
creatinine, liver enzymes,
ESR

Abnormal results:
evaluate and treat

Fatigue either resolved
or appropriate to degree
of abnormality

Normal results

Fatigue greater
than appropriate
for disease

Persistent fatigue,
no medical cause found

G Psychosocial
assessment

Cont’d on p 9

8
I. Clinically evaluate cases of prolonged or chronic fatigue by:
A. History and physical examination
B. Mental status examination (abnormalities require appropriate
psychiatric, psychologic, or neurologic examination)
C. Tests (abnormal results that strongly suggest an exclusionary condition
must be resolved)
1. Screening lab tests: CBC, ESR, ALT, total protein, albumin, globulin,
alkaline phosphatase, Ca, PO4, glucose, BUN, electrolytes,
creatinine, TSH, and UA
2. Additional tests as clinically indicated to exclude other diagnoses

Exclude case if another cause
for chronic fatigue is found.

II. Classify case as either chronic fatigue syndrome or idiopathic
chronic fatigue if fatigue persists or relapses for #6 months.

A. Classify as chronic fatigue syndrome if:
a. Criteria for severity of fatigue are met, and
b. Four or more of the following symptoms are
concurrently present for #6 months:
Impaired memory or concentration
Sore throat
Tender cervical or axillary lymph nodes
Muscle pain
Multijoint pain
New headaches
Unrefreshing sleep
Postexertion malaise

B. Classify as idiopathic chronic
fatigue if fatigue severity or
symptom criteria for chronic
fatigue syndrome are not met.

III. Subgroup research cases by the presence or absence of the
following essential parameters:
A. Comorbid conditions (psychiatric conditions must be
documented by use of an instrument)
B. Current level of fatigue (measured by a scale)
C. Duration of fatigue
D. Durrent level of physical function (measured by an instrument)

Subgroup research cases further as needed by potional parameters
such as epidemiologic or laboratory features of interest.

Figure 1. Evaluation and classification of unexplained chronic fatigue. ALT, alanine aminotransferase; BUN, blood
urea nitrogen; CBC, complete blood count; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; PO4, phosphorus; TSH, thyroidstimulating hormone; UA, urinalysis. (From Fukuda K, Strauss SE, Hickie I, et al: The chronic fatigue syndrome: a
comprehensive approach to its definition and study. International Chronic Fatigue Syndrome Study Group. Ann Intern
Med 1994;121:953–959.

9
Psychosocial assessment
(Cont’d from p 7)

H Psychiatric diagnosis

identified: depression,
anxiety disorder,
somatoform disorder,
other
Treat or refer

I No specific psychiatric
diagnosis identified

J Symptomatic treatment:

reorganize schedule,
graduated activity/exercise
to minimize deconditioning;
consider referral to cognitive
therapy

in origin, it is helpful to the maintenance of a strong
therapeutic relationship for the primary physician to do
the assessment if possible.
H. The most common cause of chronic fatigue is major
depression, followed by anxiety disorders and somatoform disorders. Treatment of these conditions is described elsewhere in this book. Many patients in this
group with fatigue rather than complaints of depressed
or anxious mood prefer to conceptualize their illness as
physical and may be more willing to take appropriate
medications if possible improvements of the physical
symptoms such as insomnia and fatigue are emphasized. Sometimes presenting a psychiatric referral as
helping with coping with an overall difficult life situation may make it more acceptable.
I. Patients who are chronically fatigued for "6 months
with no specific cause identified may meet criteria for
the chronic fatigue syndrome (see Figure 1). These
criteria are useful for research purposes, but because
there is no specific cause or treatment associated with
the criteria, these patients should be treated like any
other patients with chronic fatigue of unknown cause.
J. About 20% of patients with chronic fatigue have no identifiable medical or psychiatric cause, a situation frustrating to both the patient and the physician. Encourage
patients to remain as active as possible because excessive
rest results in deconditioning, which exacerbates the fatigue. This can be accomplished by scheduling important

Social/situational
problem identified

Referral/treatment

activities when fatigue is least severe (a symptom diary is
helpful) and encouraging regular mild exercise (graded
by the patient to avoid severe exhaustion). For patients
with fibromyalgia, stretching and swimming are useful.
Chronic fatigue and the inability to perform activities
previously taken for granted cause major social stress and
grief. Brief cognitive therapy geared toward refocusing
goals and expectations has proved useful. Patient support
groups are less helpful. These modalities also can help
patients with chronic fatigue of a known cause.

References
Bates DW, Schmitt W, Buchwald D, et al. Prevalence of fatigue and
chronic fatigue syndrome in a primary care practice. Arch Intern Med
1993;153:2759.
Manu P, Lane TJ, Matthews DA. Chronic fatigue and chronic fatigue
syndrome: clinical epidemiology and aetiological classification. CIBA
Foundation Symposium 1993;173:23.
Patel V, Kirkwood BR, Weiss H, et al. Chronic fatigue in developing
countries: populations-based survey of women in India. BMJ
2005;330:1990.
Ruffin MT, Cohen M. Evaluation and management of fatigue. Am Fam
Physician 1994;50:625.
Wessely S, Chalder T, Hirsh S, et al. The prevalence and morbidity of
chronic fatigue and chronic fatigue syndrome: a prospective primary
care study. Am J Public Health 1997;87:1449.
Whiting P, Bagnall AM, Sowden A, et al. Interventions for the treatment
and management of chronic fatigue syndrome: a systematic review.
JAMA 2001;286:1360.

