FEVER OF UNKNOWN ORIGIN

Fever of unknown origin (FUO) is defined as follows:
1. Temperature !38.3° C on multiple occasions
2. Duration !3 weeks, and
3. Evaluation on at least three outpatient visits or 3 days
as an inpatient, including at least 48 hours of blood
culture incubation
These criteria tend to eliminate protracted viral illness
or other self-limited etiologies from being classified
as FUO. Classic FUO is considered separately from
FUO associated with HIV, neutropenia, or hospitalization.
The latter conditions have their own distinct differential
diagnoses.
More than 200 etiologies of classic FUO have been
reported in the literature. Because of advances in diagnostic imaging, the epidemiology of FUO has been changing
in recent years. The proportion of cases resulting from occult tumor or abscess is decreasing, and the proportion of
cases undiagnosed after intensive evaluation is increasing.
Historically, infection has been the most common cause of
FUO. In more recent case series, noninfectious inflammatory diseases—including collagen vascular and granulomatous diseases—and infections have been culpable in approximately equal proportions. In subgroups, such as
patients !65 years, inflammatory causes are more common than infectious causes, particularly temporal arteritis
and polymyalgia rheumatica.
In the evaluation of FUO, resist the temptation to order
a “panel” of tests. Order appropriate tests based on clues
from the history, physical examination, and initial laboratory evaluation. Order only those tests appropriate to your
clinical suspicion, and interpret serology results with caution. Remember that when the pretest probability of a
disease is low, even a test with high specificity will yield
many more false-positive results than true-positive results.
A. Verify the presence of fever. Have the patient keep
a temperature log at least twice daily. In a National
Institutes of Health case series, 35% of patients

346

referred for evaluation of FUO either did not have
fever or had factitious fever. Suspect factitious fever if
other symptoms are not present (e.g., chills, tachycardia, weight loss) and in patients with health care work
experience. Discontinue nonessential drugs because
drug fever should cease within 72 hours of removal
of the offending agent. The fever pattern itself is of
historic interest but is nondiagnostic.
B. In the history, pay particular attention to medications,
history of prior surgery or malignancy, travel history,
occupational exposures, pets, insect exposures, HIV
risk factors, tuberculosis exposures, sick contacts, and
family history. A meticulous physical examination must
be performed. Include a careful examination of the
oropharynx, mucous membranes, temporal artery,
lymph nodes, rectum, and skin and nails.
C. Basic laboratory evaluation in FUO includes CBC
with differential, peripheral smear, electrolytes, liver
enzymes and bilirubin, lactate dehydrogenase, urinalysis with microscopy, urine culture, three sets of
blood cultures, HIV serology, ESR, C-reactive protein, tuberculin skin testing, ANA, and rheumatoid
factor. Bear in mind the possibility of false-negative
results (e.g., anergy to tuberculin skin testing in patients with military tuberculosis) and false-positive
results (e.g., rheumatoid factor can be positive because of cross-reactivity with other antibodies). Imaging should include a chest radiograph (CXR) and a
CT scan of the abdomen/pelvis because the diagnostic yield is high. Radiographic abnormalities should
be pursued by diagnostic aspiration or biopsy. When
tissue is obtained, send aerobic and anaerobic bacterial cultures, mycology cultures, acid-fast bacilli smear
and culture, and histopathology.
(Continued on page 348)

347
Patient with FEVER OF UNKNOWN ORIGIN
Exclude HIV-associated,
neutropenic, nosocomial fevers
Classic FUO

A Confirm true fever;

exclude drug fever and
factitious fever

B Detailed history and

physical examination

C Basic laboratory tests,
CXR, and CT of
abdomen/pelvis

Cont’d on p 349

348
D. Common infectious causes of FUO to consider include
infective endocarditis, tuberculosis, occult abscesses,
osteomyelitis, complicated urinary tract infection,
dental abscess, and sinusitis. Apply the Duke criteria
when endocarditis is suspected. If tuberculosis is the
cause of FUO, it is usually extrapulmonary. Recall that
the tuberculin skin test and CXR may be negative in
disseminated tuberculosis. Viral infections are rarely
the cause of FUO, with the exception of cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, and HIV. Consider geographically restricted infectious diseases in the appropriate
patient (e.g., coccidioidomycosis in patients residing in
the southwest United States).
Common malignant etiologies of FUO include
hematologic malignancies, particularly lymphoma;
renal cell carcinoma; metastatic disease to the liver;
and any malignancy causing obstruction with secondary infection.
Inflammatory diseases often involve multiple organ
systems and may cause FUO. The longer the duration
of fever, the more likely an inflammatory etiology. In
younger patients, consider Still’s disease, inflammatory
bowel disease, lupus, sarcoidosis, and vasculitides. In
older patients, suspect temporal arteritis and polymyalgia rheumatica even in the absence of classic physical
findings such as a tender temporal artery. Patients often have a markedly elevated ESR. Set a low threshold
to obtain a generous-sized temporal artery biopsy.
There are many other causes of FUO. Consider
thyroiditis; thromboembolic disease; hereditary fever
syndromes such as familial Mediterranean fever; fever
caused by a disease process involving the CNS; pheochromocytoma; and rare diseases such as Behçet’s disease, Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease, or hemophagocytic
syndrome. Exhaustive lists of unusual causes of FUO
are available in reference texts.
E. When diagnosis remains uncertain, proceed with a noninvasive workup guided by clues from the initial evaluation.
Useful tests can include transesophageal echocardiography to evaluate for infective endocarditis; lower extremity
Doppler ultrasound, ventilation/perfusion scans, or chest

CT angiography to evaluate for thromboembolic disease;
nuclear imaging with labeled WBCs to help localize an
infectious or inflammatory focus for further investigation;
complete dental radiographs to rule out an abscess; and
selected serologies in the setting of specific patient
demographics and geographic location, particularly serologies for Q fever, brucellosis, and rickettsial diseases.
F. If clinical deterioration occurs or the patient and clinician desire a more aggressive workup, liver biopsy is
recommended. The diagnostic yield is 14%–17%,
but this must be weighed against the risk of complications from the procedure. A recent review documented that the diagnostic yield of bone marrow biopsy in patients who are immunocompetent is
0%–2%, and it is not recommended unless there is a
strong suspicion of bone marrow involvement, such
as in patients with pancytopenia. Exploratory laparotomy is of limited benefit in the era of diagnostic
CT scans and should be reserved as a last resort for
patients with FUO and abdominal pain. Empiric
treatment is warranted only in patients with marked
clinical deterioration. Consider a trial of antipyretics,
antibiotics, antituberculous therapy, or corticosteroids (but avoid corticosteroids if infection remains a
strong possibility).
G. The cause may remain unknown in up to as many
as 30% of patients even after thorough evaluation.
Watchful waiting is favored over empiric trials of
therapy because patients with undiagnosed FUO have
an excellent prognosis and many recover spontaneously. If treatment is begun, spontaneous resolution
may be confused with response to treatment.
References
Knockaert DC, Vanderschueren S, Blockmans D. Fever of unknown
origin in adults: 40 years on. J Intern Med 2003;253:263–275.
Mackowiak PA, Durack DT. Fever of unknown origin. In Mandell GL,
Bennett JE, Dolin R, eds. Principles and Practices of Infectious Diseases,
6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone, 2005:718–729.
Mourad O, Palda V, Detsky AS. A comprehensive evidence-based approach
to fever of unknown origin. Arch Intern Med 2003;163:545–551.

349
Patient with FEVER OF UNKNOWN ORIGIN
(Cont’d from p 347)

D Consider infectious,

inflammatory, malignant,
and other causes

E No tentative diagnosis
Noninvasive workup:
Echocardiogram
Lower extremity Doppler ultrasound,
ventilation/perfusion scan,
or chest CT angiography
Selected serologies
Nuclear imaging

Repeat history and physical
examination, basic laboratory tests

G No clinical deterioration
Watchful waiting

F Clinical deterioration
Invasive workup:
Liver biopsy
Selected patients:
Bone marrow biopsy,
exploratory laparotomy
Consider empiric treatment

Tentative diagnosis
Confirmatory tests,
appropriate management

