FLATULENCE

A. Flatulence is the passage of excess intestinal gas per
rectum or the feeling that excessive gas is in the abdomen. Many patients complain of bloating, meaning
that the abdomen becomes uncomfortably distended,
usually after eating. Often, bloating is attributed to
excessive intestinal gas. However, the perception that
the passage of flatus or the amount of intestinal gas is
excessive may be inaccurate because it may not actually be due to an abnormal amount of intestinal gas.
Patients who complain of excessive flatus or of abdominal pain from gas sometimes have disorders of gut
motility and a heightened pain response to intestinal
gas, rather than excess intestinal gas. Some patients
who complain of abdominal pain and bloating do have
demonstrable disorders, such as peptic disease, gallbladder disease, Crohn’s disease, or recurrent bowel
obstruction. If, in addition to complaints of gaseousness, the patient has loss of weight, localized abdominal pain, vomiting, or blood in the stool, the suspicion
of an organic GI disorder is increased.
B. Bacterial action on dietary substrates produces gas.
Some patients can identify certain foods that aggravate
the symptoms. A common offender is lactose, which
causes excess intestinal gas production, cramps, and
diarrhea in lactase-deficient individuals. Elimination of
milk and milk products, legumes, cabbage, and similar
foods may be effective in alleviating symptoms.
C. Perform sigmoidoscopy and a barium enema or colonoscopy to look for anorectal disease and colonic

218

disorders. Reflux into the terminal ileum may identify
Crohn’s disease.
D. Upper GI and small bowel x-ray series may identify
Crohn’s disease of the small intestine, recurrent small
bowel obstruction, or other disorders of the upper GI
tract. Ultrasonography of the abdomen and pelvis may
identify gallstones or an extraintestinal mass.
E. Testing gut motor function may help diagnose a motility disorder, neuropathy, or systemic disease such as
scleroderma. Hydrogen breath testing can suggest carbohydrate malabsorption or small bowel bacterial
overgrowth.
F. High-fiber bulking agents or so-called antispasmodics,
such as dicyclomine, may be useful in patients who
have no demonstrable treatable disorder or in whom a
specific food has not been implicated. However, bulking agents, because they contain nondigestible substrates, may cause increased flatus. In some patients,
stress reduction therapy may be helpful.
References
American Gastroenterological Association website. Gas in the digestive
tract. www.gastro.org.
Azpiroz F. Intestinal gas dynamics: mechanisms and clinical relevance.
Gut 2005;54:893.
Hasler WL. Approach to the patient with gas and bloating. In Yamada T,
Alpers DH, Kaplowitz N, et al, eds. Textbook of Gastroenterology, 4th
ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2003:802.
Rao SS. Belching, bloating, and flatulence. How to help patients who
have troublesome abdominal gas. Postgrad Med 1997;101:275.

219
Patient with FLATULENCE

A History

Physical examination

If stools are loose, examine
for ova, parasites, leukocytes,
and bacterial pathogens

Normal

B Eliminate offending
agents in diet

Treat
Accordingly

Effective

Not effective

C

No further
evaluation

Sigmoidoscopy
and Barium Enema
or Colonoscopy

Normal

D Consider:

Abnormal

Upper GI and
small bowel
x-ray series
Abdominal
ultrasonography

Normal

E Consider:

Gut motility testing
or hygrogen breath
testing

Treat
Accordingly

Abnormal

F Consider:

Abnormal

Treatment with
bulking agents,
antispasmodics,
or stress reduction

Treat
Accordingly

