FOOT PAIN


More than for any other part of the musculoskeletal system, pain in the foot must be approached with attention to
possible musculoskeletal, vascular, neurologic, and dermatologic causes.
A. A history of foot trauma usually merits plain radiography using anteroposterior (AP), medial oblique, and
lateral views. Even when the history is highly suggestive of a soft-tissue injury such as an ankle sprain, it is
wise to rule out fracture as a component of the injury.
Point tenderness over bony prominences, especially if
it persists for more than a few days after injury, increases suspicion for fracture. Chronic, repetitive
trauma commonly results in stress fractures in the foot,
or tarsal sinus syndrome. Sometimes these conditions
require MRI for diagnosis.
B. A musculoskeletal cause of foot pain is indicated by
pain and tenderness associated with particular joints or
tendons. Squeezing across the base of the toes is a
good screening test for metatarsophalangeal (MTP)
joint involvement. Squeezing across the foot at the
highest point of the arch is a good screening test for
midfoot (tarsal) joint involvement. A suggestion of arthritis by these tests merits workup for polyarthritis or
monoarthritis, usually involving radiography and sometimes joint aspiration or laboratory testing.
C. There are numerous nonarthritic but nevertheless
musculoskeletal causes of foot pain. Pes cavus, pes
planus, malalignment of the ankle at the tibiotalar
joint, hallux valgus (bunion), and hammertoe are readily detectable on examination, particularly with the
patient standing. Morton’s neuroma and synovial cysts
are benign conditions presenting as painful nodules.
Pain and tenderness of the plantar aponeurosis, especially at its insertion into the calcaneus, suggest plantar
fasciitis. Tendonitis, especially of the Achilles tendon,
tibialis posterior, peroneal, and tibialis anterior, is common and is apparent on examination by pain with resisted contraction of the relevant muscle group and
often by passive stretching, point tenderness, or both.
D. Arterial flow should be assessed by palpation of the dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial pulses and by assessment
of color, hair density, and capillary refill in the toes. Arterial insufficiency is usually caused by atherosclerosis,
often with small vessel disease superimposed in people

532

with diabetes and less commonly by embolic disease or
vasculitis. Venous insufficiency presents with edema and
is usually only painful during a phase of rapid increase
or if associated with stasis dermatitis. A suggestion of
arterial insufficiency by examination should lead to subsequent testing by Doppler ultrasound. Unilateral foot
swelling should lead to Doppler testing to rule out deep
venous thrombosis.
E. A generalized peripheral neuropathy, whether from
diabetes or another cause, usually produces a symmetric loss of sensation beginning in the toes and slowly
progressing proximally. Mononeuritis multiplex is a
syndrome with asymmetric damage to peripheral
nerves, often caused by vasculitis; confirmation by
nerve conduction studies may be required. Small-fiber
neuropathy often presents without evidence of damage
to larger nerves, with absence of overt sensory loss or
weakness. All neuropathies can present with hypersensitivity to painful stimuli (hyperalgesia) or perception
of nonpainful stimuli as painful (allodynia). Tarsal tunnel syndrome is a syndrome of pain and paresthesia of
the toes, sole, and medial foot resulting from compression of the posterior tibial nerve in the flexor retinaculum, located posterior and inferior to the medial malleolus. Confirmation of nerve compression by nerve
conduction studies is often necessary.
F. Bacterial skin infection (cellulitis) of the foot is often
difficult to distinguish from acute arthritis. Focal tenderness away from underlying joints is a helpful sign, especially if one can move nearby joints painlessly. Diffuse
inflammation of the soft tissues of the ankle and foot
(periarthritis) can be diagnosed analogously. This finding
is particularly associated with a benign, self-limited subtype of sarcoidosis known as Löfgren’s syndrome. Chronic
edema in the feet can lead to stasis dermatitis, which is
usually pruritic but sometimes painful.

References
Casellini CM, Vinik AI. Clinical manifestations and current treatment
options for diabetic neuropathies. Endoct Pract 2007;13:550–566.
Van Wyngarden TM. The painful foot, Part I: common forefoot deformities.
Am Fam Physician 1997;55:1866–1876.
Van Wyngarden TM. The painful foot, Part II: common rearfoot deformities.
Am Fam Physician 1997;55:2207–2212.

533
Patient with FOOT PAIN

History and
Physical examination

A Trauma

D Vascular

Musculoskeletal

Consider:
Fracture
Sprain

Arterial

Doppler
arterial
studies

Radiographs

Consider MRI

B Arthritis

C Nonarthritic:

See the chapters
Polyarthritis and
Monoarthritis
Radiographs

Biomechanical
Plantar fasciitis
Tendonitis
Morton’s
neuroma

Venous

Doppler
venous
studies
if unilateral

E Neurologic

F Skin and soft tissues

Consider:
Polyneuropathy
Mononeuritis multiplex
Small-fiber neuropathy
Tarsal tunnel syndrome

Consider:
Nerve conduction
studies

Consider:
Infection
Periarthritis
Stasis dermatitis

