FOREIGN BODY INGESTION

The majority of foreign body ingestions pass asymptomatically through the GI tract, with most occurring in the
pediatric patient population. In adults the majority of foreign body ingestions causing esophageal impaction result
from food (meat and bones); in children, coins are most
common. Patients with preexisting esophageal stricture or
those who use dentures, have psychiatric disease, or have
mental retardation are particularly susceptible to esophageal impaction.
A. The vast majority of foreign body ingestions can be
managed expectantly. The approach to an ingested
foreign body depends greatly on the patient’s past
medical history, the time of ingestion, and what was
ingested. If the ingestion results in obstruction, determining anatomic point of obstruction is important.
Certain foreign bodies deserve special attention:
button or disk batteries may contain the alkaline potassium hydroxide and a number of heavy metals such
as lithium, nickel, zinc, cadmium, or mercury. Most
batteries are not biologically sealed. Batteries in
the esophagus must be removed urgently because of
the possibility of liquefaction necrosis from the alkaline solution and subsequent perforation and/or pressure necrosis of the esophageal wall. Once the battery
passes into the stomach, spontaneous passage from
the body is likely to follow and may be documented by
repeat radiographs. Lack of passage from the stomach
after 48 hours or lack of progression below the stomach after 72 hours may necessitate surgical or endoscopic intervention. If a radiograph shows the battery
integrity has been violated, consider GI tract decontamination with lavage, charcoal, and cathartic; consult the local poison control center for consideration
of chelation therapy.
Sharp objects (e.g., fish or chicken bones, pins,
needles) lodged in the esophagus must be urgently
removed. If an object is above the cricopharyngeal
muscles, direct laryngoscopy is the simplest initial approach, whereas immediate esophagoscopy is applied
for objects below this point. Although most sharp
objects that reach the stomach pass spontaneously
through the rest of the digestive tract, there is a 35%
complication rate.
History and physical examination are brief and directed with careful attention to airway compromise. A
detailed examination of the oral and nasal pharynx for
erythema, edema, abrasions, and cuts may guide the
clinician to the foreign body. Evaluate the neck and soft
636

B.

C.

D.

E.

tissues for subcutaneous emphysema. Auscultate and
percuss the neck and chest for stridor, breath sounds,
wheezing, hyperresonance, or dullness to percussion.
Use of topical anesthesia such as Cetacaine or viscous
lidocaine for the mucosa will facilitate examination of
the pharynx and hypopharynx with direct or indirect
laryngoscope. If the object is visualized and no sharp or
jagged edges are known to be present, remove it with
Magill forceps.
Plain radiographs may be able to demonstrate the
foreign body if it is radiopaque. Many foreign bodies,
such as food and fish bones, will not show up on
radiographs. Soft-tissue neck films may show air in the
subcutaneous tissues, indicating perforation, and may
be able to detect if the foreign body is in the trachea
or the esophagus. Coins lodged in the trachea tend
to align in the sagittal plane; those in the esophagus
usually appear in the coronal alignment. An anteroposterior view of the chest may show a pneumothorax,
the foreign body, a lung abscess, or lobar atelectasis.
Finally, if indicated by the lack of findings on the first
two radiographs, obtain a flat and upright plate of the
abdomen to determine whether the foreign body is
indeed radiolucent and has already passed beyond the
pylorus. If the patient complains of abdominal pain,
look for signs of obstruction or perforation such as
free air under the diaphragm.
If the foreign body was aspirated, symptoms may range
from throat pain, cough, or stridor to episodes of cyanosis or apnea and acute respiratory distress or collapse. Rarely, a patient may present late with signs and
symptoms of postobstructive infection. In cases of
complete airway obstruction, do an oropharyngeal
sweep, Heimlich maneuver, and direct laryngoscopy as
indicated and have Magill forceps on hand to remove
the object if it is visualized. If unsuccessful, prepare for
cricothyrotomy.
If a foreign body acts as a one-way valve in a mainstem
bronchus, air can get in but not out. Expiratory
wheezes are present on physical examination, and
the involved, partially obstructed lung may appear
overexpanded and hyperlucent on an expiratory chest
radiograph. The diaphragm may appear fixed and
flat, and the heart and mediastinum may be shifted
to the opposite, uninvolved side. When the obstruction becomes complete, air cannot get in or out and
the involved lung may appear atelectatic on radiographs, with the heart and mediastinum shifted to
the involved side.
(Continued on page 638)

637
Patient with INGESTED FOREIGN BODY

A History

Physical examination

B

Direct or Indirect
Laryngoscopy

C Radiography to determine location

Foreign body in
airway

D Symptoms

Complete
airway
obstruction
Oropharyngeal
sweep
Heimlich
maneuver
Cricothyrotomy

Partial
airway
obstruction

E Inspiratory/
expiratory
chest film

Bronchoscopy

Foreign body in
esophagus

Foreign body in
stomach

Cont’d on p 639

Cont’d on p 639

638
F. Inability to swallow, trouble with secretions, and refusal
to eat are common symptoms of an esophageal obstruction. Patients also may be vomiting or gagging and may
complain of neck, throat, or chest pain. The most common sites of obstruction are those where physiologic
narrowing occurs (e.g., the level of the cricopharyngeal
muscle, the aortic arch, the gastroesophageal junction,
Schatzki’s ring).
G. The patient may be given a suction catheter to manage
and control secretions.
H. After spontaneous passage of a known esophageal
foreign body, perform nonemergent esophagoscopy
to evaluate the esophagus for possible perforation and/
or an underlying pathologic condition. No foreign body
should remain in the esophagus for !24 hours because
of the increased risk of perforation into the trachea or
heart, fistula formation, and mediastinitis. Endoscopy
is the procedure of choice for visualization of the
esophagus and removal of foreign bodies.
I. Anticipate vomiting after the foreign body is dislodged;
be prepared to deal with subsequent complications.
Prior to the advent of endoscopy, foreign body removal
with nasogastric tubes, Foley catheters, and ring magnets were not uncommon but are now considered
contraindicated.
J. If esophageal obstruction is considered to result from a
food impaction in the lower esophagus, IV glucagon
may be administered to attempt to relax the smooth
muscles and the lower gastroesophageal sphincter without inhibiting peristalsis. After a test dose to exclude
hypersensitivity to the drug, give a 1-mg dose of IV glucagon with the patient in the upright position. Repeat
with a second dose of 2 mg if the patient experiences no
relief 20 minutes after the first injection. Each dose

should be followed by an oral challenge with water. If
the obstruction is relieved, perform esophagoscopy to
evaluate for damage or an underlying pathologic condition. Although carbonated beverages were once thought
to be useful for esophageal obstruction, they have not
been shown to have any role in relieving esophageal
food impaction. Administering meat tenderizer, papain,
is contraindicated because it may cause esophageal erosion and perforation.
K. Consider endoscopic removal for all potentially sharp
objects in the stomach. Objects thicker than 2–2.5 cm
have a high likelihood of requiring endoscopic removal
because they tend to get stuck at the pylorus, and those
longer than 10 cm tend to get stuck at the duodenal
sweep. Failure to progress as documented by radiographs is an indication to intervene and remove the
object by endoscopic means.
L. Most foreign bodies that pass the pylorus are excreted
per rectum in 24–72 hours without complications. Antacids and cathartics have not proved to be of value.
Expectant observation may or may not include repeat
radiographs to document advancement of the foreign
body. If there is abdominal pain, nausea, or vomiting,
obtain a radiograph to determine the presence of an
obstruction or perforation. Surgical consultation and
intervention may be indicated.
References
Duncan M, Wong RK. Esophageal emergencies: things that will wake
you from a sound sleep. Gastroenterol Clin 2003;32(4):1035–1052.
Lowell M. In Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds. Rosen’s Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice, 5th ed. St Louis:
Mosby, 2002:1234.
Uyemura MC. Foreign body ingestion in children. Am Fam Physician
2005;72(2):287–291.

639
Patient with INGESTED FOREIGN BODY
(Cont’d from p 637)

F Foreign body in

Foreign body in
stomach

esophagus?

No

K

Yes

Expectant
management

G

Upper
esophagus

Beyond
pylorus

Esophagogastroduodenoscopy

Expectant
observation

L Abdominal

Place
Nasogastric
Tube

Spontaneous
passage

H

Above
pylorus

radiography
every 3–4 days

No
passage

Esophagogastroduodenoscopy

Lower
esophagus

I Anticipate complications
J Lower esophagus:
Consider glucagon

I Consider:

J Consider:

Magnet
tube
Foley
catheter
Esophagoscopy

Glucagon

Surgical
consultation
and intervention

