FOREIGN TRAVEL: IMMUNIZATIONS AND INFECTIONS

A. Two questions must be asked in the initial evaluation of
a traveler: What is the patient’s health status, and
where will he or she travel? Variables to consider include countries to be visited, whether travel will be
rural or urban, planned activities, and duration of visit.
It is important to remember that persons returning to
visit their country of origin after living in the United
States are also at risk for endemic infections, sometimes more so because they may not feel the need to
take special precautions.
B. Infections are acquired through exposure to contaminated food and water, exposure to vectors, such as ticks
and mosquitoes, and person-to-person transmission.
Travelers should be advised to practice strict hand hygiene and to avoid uncooked food and food from street
vendors. They should consume only bottled beverages
and use bottled water for ice cubes and for brushing
teeth, etc. Fresh water exposure (adventure travel) is a
potential source of infections, such as schistosomiasis and
leptospirosis. Sexually transmitted diseases, including
HIV, are always a risk and travelers should be advised to
abstain from sex or to use condoms for all encounters.
Travelers should also consider carrying sterile needles
and syringes with them in case of medical emergency.
C. One of the first things to be ascertained is that the traveler is up to date with the standard Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC) vaccination schedule for
children and adults; this includes pneumococcus, influenza, tetanus, and measle/mumps/rubella (MMR) vaccines because these infections have been acquired overseas. All overseas travelers should be encouraged to be
vaccinated against hepatitis A, hepatitis B, polio, and
typhoid. Yellow fever occurs only in sub-Saharan Africa
and tropical South America, and many countries in
these regions require proof of vaccination for entry. A
meningitis vaccine is recommended for those traveling
to areas in the meningitis belt across central Africa, and

296

Saudi Arabia requires that Hajj and Umrah visitors have
a certificate of vaccination. For those who will be traveling to areas where rabies is relatively common but the
immune globulin and vaccine would not be immediately available (e.g., trekkers), preexposure vaccination should be considered. Japanese encephalitis vaccine may be indicated in some cases for travelers to
Southeast Asia. The cholera vaccine is currently not
recommended.
D. Malaria prevention should be a comprehensive endeavor, including remaining in screened areas when
possible and using a mosquito net at night, minimizing
skin exposure to mosquitos, using insect repellents,
and chemoprophylaxis with Malarone (atovaquoneproguanil), doxycycline, or mefloquine. Mefloquine
has the advantage of requiring a weekly (rather than
daily) dose but has the not uncommon downside of
neuropsychiatric side effects. As a result of the emergence of chloroquine resistance, chloroquine prophylaxis is useful only for travelers going to the Caribbean
and Central America north of the Panama Canal. Appropriate antimalaria precautions will also protect a
traveler from other mosquito and tick-borne illnesses,
such as dengue and rickettsial illnesses.
E. Diarrhea is the most common illness in travelers. The
importance of adequate hydration in such cases should
be emphasized. Increasing resistance to fluoroquinolones limits their usefulness in parts of Asia where
azithromycin is recommended. Patients should be
given at least a 3-day supply of antibiotics to take with
them and instructed to take them in case of moderate
to severe diarrhea with fever or pus, mucus, or blood
in the stool. If treatment is initiated promptly, even a
single dose may reduce the duration of the illness to a
few hours. Pepto-Bismol taken every 30 minutes for
eight doses has also been shown to decrease stool frequency and shorten illness duration.
(Continued on page 298)

297
Person for TRAVELS TO FOREIGN AREA

Before travel

A Health status/
travel plans

Standard CDC
vaccine schedule:
MMR
Polio
Pneumococcus
Tetanus/diphtheria

B Counseling for

C Immunizations

Indicated for travel:
Hepatitis A
Hepatitis B
Polio booster
Typhoid

Prevention:
Minimize skin
exposure
Insect repellent
Screens/nets
Chemoprophylaxis:
Malarone
Doxycycline
Potential exposure:
Mefloquine
Japanese encephalitis
Meningococcus
Rabies
Yellow fever

avoiding infection

D Malaria

E Diarrhea
Prevention:
Cooked food
Bottled water
Hand hygiene
Hydration
Pepto-Bismol
If fever or blood/
pus in stool:
Quinolone or
azithromycin
1– 3 days

298
F. If a traveler returns with a nonspecific febrile
illness, things that are life threatening, transmissible,
or treatable must be excluded immediately. Malaria
must be investigated (regardless of prophylaxis
history) through thick and thin blood smears. If malaria parasites are seen on smear but no speciation is
possible, treatment should be targeted to Plasmodium
falciparum, which is the most virulent species, and
should be assumed to be drug resistant. The incubation period for malaria can be as short as 1 week and as
long as several months (even years). Blood cultures for
typhoid should be obtained (regardless of vaccination
status). Typhoid fever may or may not include GI
symptoms. Suspicion for a highly contagious and morbid illness, such as a hemorrhagic fever or the recent
severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), in patients
with compatible symptoms and returning from affected areas should be reported to local health departments immediately.
G. Once investigation is under way for malaria and
typhoid, further clinical investigation should be
dictated by history (e.g., contact with fresh water, recent unprotected sexual activity) and localizing signs
and symptoms (e.g., diarrhea, cough, rash). Dengue
is common in travelers and although it causes much
discomfort is generally self-limited. Dengue hemorrhagic fever, manifesting with plasma leakage, platelets !100,000 per ml, fever lasting 2–7 days, hemorrhagic tendency, and possibly the development of
shock, is generally limited to individuals experiencing
repeat dengue infection and treatment is supportive.

The CDC maintains a website containing updated
information about regional outbreaks that can also
help guide workup.
H. If a patient returns with diarrhea, stool should
be sent for culture (Escherichia coli, Salmonella, Shigella, Campylobacter) and ova and parasite (O&P)
three times. Respiratory symptoms may result from
viral infections and should be evaluated in much the
same way as for nontravelers. Because tuberculosis
(TB) is rarely acquired by short-term travelers, it
should be more seriously considered in those having
been abroad for months or years and an acid-fast bacillus (AFB) smear should be done. Domestic infections
should also be considered (e.g., urinary tract infection
[UTI], upper respiratory infection [URI]).
I. A partial list of illnesses that can be seen in returning
travelers is provided in the algorithm; when in doubt,
patients should be referred to a specialized travel clinic
and sometimes to an emergency department. See also
the useful websites listed in the references.

References
Ryan ET, Kain KC. Health advice and immunizations for travelers.
N Engl J Med 2000;342:1716–1725.
Ryan ET, Wilson ME, Kain KC. Illness after international travel. N Engl
J Med 2002;347:505–516.
www.cdc.gov/malaria/travel/index.htm.
wwwn.cdc.gov/travel/destinationList.aspx.
wwwn.cdc.gov/travel/notices.aspx.
wwwn.cdc.gov/travel/yellowBookCh4-Diarrhea.aspx.
wwwn.cdc.gov/travel/yellowBookCh9-Immunocompromised.aspx.

299
Person for TRAVELS TO FOREIGN AREA

After travel

F Fever
Malaria smears
CBC
WBC differential
Blood cultures for
typhoid or other
bacteremia

G Further workup

H Diarrhea

Cough
Chest x-ray
Viral swab
Sputum
Gram stain culture
AFB for TB
Legionella antigen
Freshwater exposure
Leptospirosis
Schistosomiasis
Sexual/blood exposure
Acute HIV
Syphilis

Stool culture for
O&P "3

I Other infections:

Domestic infection (UTI, URI,
peanut agglutinin)
Dengue
Leishmania
Rickettsial illness (scrub or
African typhus)
TB
Hepatitis A, B, C, or E
Tissue-invasive parasites
Liver abscess
Chikungunya fever
Plague
Cytomegalovirus
Epstein-Barr virus
Toxoplasmosis
Acute histoplasmosis
Brucellosis

