GAIT DISTURBANCES


Gait disturbances denote a problem with the initiation
and/or maintenance of walking. Many gait disturbances
are not primarily of neurologic etiology (e.g., medication effects, illness-related deconditioning). Neurologic
systems subserving gait include the frontal cortex and white
matter, basal ganglia, diencephalon, midbrain, cerebellum,
vestibular system, spinal cord, peripheral nervous system,
and muscle. Thus, the initial evaluation of gait disturbances
seeks to localize the dysfunction. Some common neurologic
etiologies of gait disturbance are reviewed here.
A. A thorough history and physical examination should
aim to determine the character and time course of the
gait disturbance and associated symptoms and signs,
such as rest tremor, bradykinesia, rigidity, numbness,
weakness, back pain, urinary incontinence, dementia,
and headaches. Alcohol use history, general medical
history, and medication use should be reviewed.
B. A spastic gait typically results from upper motor
neuron (UMN; cerebral or spinal cord) dysfunction
from conditions such as cerebrovascular disease or demyelinating disorders, including multiple sclerosis
(MS). In the older population, a common myelopathic
etiology of spastic gait is cervical spondylosis. In the
younger population, myelopathy may be associated
with a demyelinating illness or trauma. This gait is characterized by stiffness in the lower extremities and circumduction of the leg. Scissoring can also be seen and
results from increased tone in the adductors. Patients
may exhibit exaggerated deep tendon reflexes (DTRs)
and may exhibit a unilateral or bilateral Babinski’s sign.
Neuroimaging of the brain and spinal cord, typically
with MRI, is important, as is a laboratory screen (e.g.,
for vitamin B12 deficiency). If a demyelinating illness is
suspected, then MRI with and without contrast should
be performed.
C. Gait disturbance from sensory dysfunction is typically
wide-based with a stamping or slapping character. The
examination may reveal reduced deep tendon reflexes,
weakness and sensory loss that are greatest distally, and
the presence of Romberg’s sign (an abnormality in
stance that occurs with eye closure). Sensory gait disturbance is usually from disorders affecting the peripheral nervous system or dorsal columns of the spinal
cord. This type of gait was classically seen in patients
with tabes dorsalis and neurosyphilis. Today it is more
commonly seen as a result of large-fiber neuropathy
secondary to certain vitamin deficiencies (B12) or diabetic peripheral neuropathy.
438

D. Neuromuscular disease can also cause an abnormal
gait. The distinguishing features are that of high steppage gait to compensate for problems such as foot
drop. Patients with illnesses such as myopathy will
present with proximal weakness and report difficulty
climbing stairs. Weakness of the hip girdle can also
lead to a waddling gait, which is a result of excess pelvic rotation. Electromyography would be helpful in
either of these scenarios to look for signs of neuropathy
or myopathy.
E. Extrapyramidal disorders arise from basal ganglia dysfunction. Associated symptoms and signs include rest
tremor, slowness, and rigidity, which could suggest
Parkinson’s disease. The parkinsonian gait is usually
associated with flexed posture, shuffling, decreased
arm swing, difficulty initiating, en bloc turning, and
festination. Chorea is seen in Huntington’s disease.
Dystonia, an involuntary contraction of muscles, can
also be a cause of gait abnormality.
F. A cerebellar gait disorder can result from an infarct,
tumor, alcohol, or demyelination. The lesion is primarily found in the flocculonodular or anterior lobes of the
cerebellum. The typical cerebellar gait is ataxic—widebased and unsteady. Tandem walking may be difficult
or impossible. Cerebellar gait disorders are usually, but
not always, associated with other cerebellar signs such
as intention tremor, dysmetria, rebound, and hypotonia. MRI is the diagnostic test of choice.
G. A frontal gait disturbance is common in older patients
and is also known as gait apraxia. Typically no weakness or
sensory loss is found. Patients walk with a wide base, short
stride, and shuffling steps, and feet appear to be “sticking
to the floor,” with difficulty initiating gait and en bloc
turning. Dementia, bilateral grasp reflexes, and a history
of urinary incontinence may be present. Etiologies of
frontal gait disorder include normal-pressure hydrocephalus, severe small vessel disease in the basal ganglia or
periventricular white matter, or large frontal lobe tumors.
MRI is essential to demonstrate ventricular size, the degree of white matter disease, and presence of tumors.
H. Toxins are one of the most common causes of gait
difficulty, including excess alcohol intake. Certain
prescription or nonprescription drugs and metabolic
derangement can also have important effects on balance and gait.
I. Psychogenic gait is a diagnosis of exclusion. Astasia–
abasia is the term used to denote such bizarre gait;
patients may exhibit dramatic fluctuation over time,
exaggerated caution, and slowness.

439
Patient with GAIT DISTURBANCE
(Orthopedic Disease Excluded)

A Abnormalities on neurologic examination

B Slowness

Spasticity
Bilateral Babinski’s
sign

D Steppage gait

F Wide-based

E Decreased arm swing

unsteady gait

Test DTRs

C Absent tendon
Paraparesis
Spine MRI
to detect
compressive
lesion

Grasp reflexes
Incontinence
Head CT or MRI
to detect
hydrocephalus
or cause of
bifrontal
dysfunction

Decreased
or absent
Peripheral
neuropathy

Increased tendon
reflexes
Unilateral
Babinski’s
sign

Parkinsonism

Hemiparesis

reflexes
Poor position
sense

Cogwheel
rigidity
and/or
rest tremor

Head CT or MRI
to confirm cause

Consider:
Friedreich’s
ataxia
Vitamin B12
deficiency
Tabes
Peripheral
neuropathy

I With

extremity
ataxia

MRI scan
to detect:
MS
Cerebellar
tumor
Brainstem
stroke
Cerebellar
atrophy

Normal

G Extremity coordination tests normal
Tandem walking difficult

Mononeuropathy

H History of recent
aminoglycoside
or streptomycin
use

Vestibular damage
from drugs

References
Gilman S. Gait disorders. In Rowland LP, ed. Merritt’s Textbook of
Neurology, 9th ed. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1995:51–56.
Nutt JG, Horak FB. Gait and balance disorders. In Watts RL, Koller WC,
eds. Movement Disorders: Neurologic Principles and Practice.
New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997:649–660.

Associated
with vertigo

History of
alcoholism

See p 424

Alcoholic vermal
degeneration

Sudarsky L. Gait impairment and falls. In Samuels MA, Feske SK, eds.
Office Practice of Neurology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone, 2003:25–29.

