GASTROINTESTINAL BLEEDING


GI bleeding generally is separated into upper and lower
GI bleeding, although sometimes the source actually is in
the “middle” (Table 1). Severity ranges from trivial to massive and may be acute or chronic. In the United States,
each year about 100 patients per 100,000 are hospitalized
for upper GI bleeding and about 20 patients per 100,000
are hospitalized for lower GI bleeding. Despite advances
in the diagnosis and treatment over the past several decades, mortality from GI bleeding remains about 5%. The
outcome is adversely affected by volume of blood loss,
advanced age, coexisting medical conditions, exposure to
GI irritants, and other factors (Table 2).
The principles of management of active GI bleeding are
the same in most patients, although diagnostic tests vary
according to the presumed site of bleeding. In emergent
situations, the sequence of history taking, physical examination, diagnostic evaluation, and treatment should be
abbreviated or altered to meet immediate demands, and
prompt resuscitation may be necessary.
A. Melena, or black stool, may develop with as little as
50 ml of blood loss from the GI tract per day. Although
melena usually results from upper GI bleeding, it can
come from a source as low as the right colon. Brisk
bleeding may cause vomiting of blood (hematemesis)
or appear as red blood per rectum (hematochezia).
Vomiting either red blood or “coffee ground” material
(which is caused by the action of gastric acid on blood)
typically signifies an upper GI source but also can result from swallowed blood from the nose or respiratory
tract. Red blood per rectum usually is a sign of lower
GI bleeding, although it may come from profuse upper
GI bleeding, such as from esophageal varices or an
eroded artery in a peptic ulcer.
Some features of the history may be diagnostically
helpful. Age of the patient makes some diagnoses
more or less likely. For example, ischemic colitis, cancer, arteriovenous malformations, and diverticulosis
are associated with advanced age, whereas none is a
probable consideration in a 25-year-old. Bleeding
from inflammatory bowel disease or a Meckel’s diverticulum is more likely in a child or young adult. Recent ingestion of aspirin, other NSAIDs, or alcohol
predisposes to gastric mucosal injury. Aspirin also inhibits platelet adhesion, which may aggravate bleeding of any cause. Patients with liver disease are at risk

196

to develop varices, but about half of upper GI bleeding in patients with known varices is from another
source. Bleeding from an esophagogastric mucosal
tear may be preceded by retching, but only about a
third of patients with Mallory-Weiss disease have that
traditional history; the diagnosis depends on endoscopy. Patients with aortoenteric fistula typically have
massive bleeding from the mouth or rectum, which
may stop abruptly; if it recurs, it may be fatal. Suspicion of an aortic aneurysm or history of an aneurysm
repair is important information in patients with massive GI bleeding that stops abruptly. Endoscopy rarely
identifies the fistula but is useful in ruling out other
causes. Aortic aneurysm repair also places the patient
at risk for ischemic colitis because of interruption of
the inferior mesenteric artery in the absence of adequate collateral circulation. Nonocclusive ischemic
vascular disease of the bowel occurs in older patients
who have a condition that predisposes them to a transient reduction in bowel perfusion, such as congestive
heart failure or cardiac arrhythmia. Such patients
characteristically have a sudden onset of moderate
lower abdominal pain with bloody stool. Usually the
course is self-limited with recovery in several days. A
few patients develop bowel infarction and require
surgery. Irradiation that includes the gut can cause
acute bleeding or bleeding months to years later; the
latter is a form of ischemic colitis as a result of radiation-induced perivascular inflammation.
B. During the physical examination the patient may appear pale and feel cool because of loss of blood and
poor peripheral perfusion. Acute blood loss causes
cardiac output and blood pressure (BP) to decrease
and pulse rate to increase. With severe volume loss,
postural compensation of BP and pulse are inadequate.
If pulse rate increases !20 beats/min and systolic BP
decreases !10 mm Hg when the patient stands, blood
loss probably exceeds 1 L. However, age, cardiovascular status, and rate of blood loss affect these postural
signs. Rectal examination provides direct access to the
GI tract and should always be done, even when upper
GI bleeding seems obvious.
C. Initial laboratory studies should include CBC, electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, glucose, calcium, phosphate,
and blood typing. Blood gases should be monitored in
patients who are severely ill. Low hemoglobin (Hgb)
(Continued on page 198)

197
Patient with GASTROINTESTINAL BLEEDING

C Initial laboratory and

A History

blood studies

B Physical examination:
Vital signs
Rectal examination

Cont’d on p 199

Table 1 Diagnostic Considerations in GI Bleeding
Upper GI Bleeding
Nose, pharynx, or lungs (swallowed)
Esophagogastric mucosal tear (Mallory-Weiss)
Esophageal rupture (Boerhaave’s syndrome)
Erosions (esophagitis, gastritis, or duodenitis)
Ulcer (esophagus, stomach, duodenum, or anastomosis)
Dieulafoy’s lesion (ruptured mucosal artery)
Angiomas
Varices (esophagus, stomach, or duodenum)
Neoplasm (carcinoma, lymphoma, leiomyoma, leiomyosarcoma, polyps)
Hemobilia
Vascular-enteric fistula (usually aortic aneurysm or graft)
“Middle” GI Bleeding
Presents as either upper or lower GI bleeding
Results from small bowel lesions, such as
Tumors
Crohn’s disease
Vascular-enteric fistulas
Lower GI Bleeding
Hemorrhoids
Inflammatory bowel disease (Crohn’s disease, ulcerative colitis)
Neoplasm (carcinoma or polyp)
Diverticulosis
Ischemic enteritis or colitis
Angiodysplasia/arteriovenous malformations
Antibiotic-associated colitis
Radiation enteritis or colitis
Amyloidosis
Meckel’s diverticulum
Vascular-enteric fistula
NSAID-associated ulcers
Brisk upper GI bleeding

and hematocrit (Hct) are attributable to blood loss, but
some patients bleed so rapidly that blood volume has
had insufficient time to equilibrate, resulting in normal
or only slightly reduced Hgb and Hct. In patients who
are actively bleeding, changes in BP and pulse and direct evidence of continued bleeding via nasogastric
(NG) tube or per rectum are better indicators of the
need to administer electrolyte solutions or replace
blood.
Determination of platelet count and clotting factors
is important so that abnormalities can be corrected
promptly. Extensive blood transfusion dilutes platelets
and clotting factors. Also, many patients who bleed
while taking therapeutic anticoagulants do so from a
clinically significant lesion. Acute GI bleeding may be
associated with a modest elevation of WBC count, but
usually not more than 15,000/mm3, so do not attribute
leukocytosis to blood loss without considering sources
of infection. BUN may increase in upper GI bleeding
as a result of absorption of nitrogenous products of
blood in the small intestine or as a result of hypovolemia. In patients with marginal liver function, the increased protein load from blood in the gut may induce
or aggravate hepatic encephalopathy; gastric lavage and
control of bleeding are particularly important in the
treatment of these patients.

198
Table 2 Prognostic Indicators in GI Bleeding
Volume of blood loss
Associated medical conditions
Ingestion of mucosal irritants
Age >60 years
Abdominal or pelvic irradiation
Recurrent bleeding
Stigmata of recent hemorrhage in an ulcer

D. For initial management promptly insert a large-bore
IV catheter into a peripheral vein; sometimes two IV
catheters are needed if bleeding is profuse. If a peripheral vein is not available, use a jugular, subclavian, or
femoral vein. A central venous pressure catheter may
be useful to evaluate the effects of volume and blood
replacement, particularly in the elderly or those with
cardiovascular disease. Rapidly infuse normal saline
until blood is available. In patients with excess body
sodium, such as those with ascites or edema, restoration of intravascular volume takes precedence over
concern for sodium overload.
E. Pass an NG tube in every patient with melena or hematemesis. Blood from the esophagus or stomach
pools in the stomach, and in !90% of bleeding duodenal ulcers, blood refluxes into the stomach. If the NG
aspirate is clear or clears promptly with lavage, the
tube may be removed. If there is a large amount of
blood or retained material, lavage the stomach with a
large-bore tube. Removal of gastric contents facilitates
subsequent endoscopy and decompresses the stomach.
Because the NG tube is uncomfortable for the patient,
predisposes to gastroesophageal reflux and pulmonary
aspiration, and may irritate the esophagus or stomach,
remove it when it is no longer useful.
F. Upper GI endoscopy or colonoscopy may reveal a specific bleeding site that indicates specific treatment,
such as ligation or sclerosis of esophageal varices.
Endoscopic treatment of bleeding lesions includes
thermal electrocoagulation; laser photocoagulation;
and injection of vasoconstrictors, ethanol, or normal
saline. The so-called stigmata of recent hemorrhage
(SRH) in an ulcer crater—which includes a protruding
vessel, an adherent clot, and oozing or spurting of
blood—have prognostic and therapeutic implications
(Table 2). Patients with SRH are more likely to have
uncontrolled or recurrent bleeding and to require
therapeutic endoscopy or surgery.
Sigmoidoscopy should be performed early in the
evaluation of acute lower GI bleeding. Emergency
colonoscopy may be attempted, but its value is limited
by stool and blood. If colonoscopy is deemed necessary

after the patient is stabilized, the gut can be cleansed
with osmotically balanced electrolyte solution by mouth
or NG tube.
G. Selective arteriography of the celiac axis, the superior
and inferior mesenteric arteries, or their branches may
be useful if endoscopy has failed to reveal a diagnosis.
Angiodysplastic lesions and vascular tumors can be
suspected by their radiographic appearance, and bleeding from other arterial lesions may be identified by a
characteristic blush and controlled with autologous
clot, gel foam, or vasoconstrictor.
Capsule endoscopy, which uses a wireless camera in
a swallowed capsule, creates thousands of pictures and
is useful in examining the small intestine beyond the
reach of the upper GI endoscope and the colonoscope.
Because it requires some bowel preparation and several hours to interpret the pictures, it is more useful in
the evaluation of obscure GI bleeding after stabilization of the patient and diagnosis of other small bowel
disorders, such as tumors and Crohn’s disease.
H. The management of acute GI bleeding requires a team
of experienced health professionals. Specific diagnostic
studies usually require the skills of an endoscopist or a
radiologist. Early surgical consultation may be valuable
in managing the patient and the surgeon is better prepared to make a decision regarding operative intervention should the need arise later.

References
American Gastroenterological Association Medical Position Statement:
Evaluation and management of occult and obscure gastrointestinal
bleeding. Gastroenterology 2000;118:197.
Bounds BC, Friedman LS. Lower gastrointestinal bleeding. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 2003;32:1107.
Comar KM, Sanyal AJ. Portal hypertensive bleeding. Gastroenterol Clin
North Am 2003;32:1079.
Eastwood GL. Acute management and identification of risk factors. In
Sugawa C, Schuman BM, Lucas CE, eds. Gastrointestinal Bleeding.
New York: Igaku-Shoin Medical Publishers, 1992:257.
Elta GH. Approach to the patient with gross gastrointestinal bleeding.
In Yamada T, Alpers DH, Kaplowitz N, et al, eds. Textbook of Gastroenterology, 4 ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
2003:698.
Huang CS, Lichtenstein DR. Nonvariceal upper gastrointestinal bleeding. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 2003;32:1053.
Kamath PS. Esophageal variceal bleeding: primary prophylaxis. Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2005;3:90.
Longstreth GF. Epidemiology of hospitalization for acute upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage: a population-based study. Am J Gastroenterol
1995;90:206.
Longstreth GF. Epidemiology and outcome of patients hospitalized for
acute lower gastrointestinal hemorrhage: a population-based study.
Am J Gastroenterol 1997;92:419.
Melmed GY, Lo SK. Capsule endoscopy: practical applications. Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2005;3:411.

199
Patient with GASTROINTESTINAL BLEEDING
(Cont’d from p 197)

D

IV Catheter
IV Electrolyte
Solutions

E

Survey for
concomitant
disease

Pass NG
Tube

No blood
in stomach

Blood in
stomach

Withdraw
tube

Leave tube
in place for
lavage

Suspect upper GI bleeding

F

consultations

Suspect lower GI bleeding

Upper GI Endoscopy

Diagnostic

H Obtain

Transfuse
Blood and
Blood Products

F

Sigmoidoscopy

Nondiagnostic

Consider:
Therapeutic
endoscopy

G Consider:

Selective
arteriography

Diagnostic

Consider:
Immediate
surgery

Rectal bleeding
(p 200)
Positive fecal
occult test (p 216)

Nondiagnostic

Bleeding
continues

G Consider:

Bleeding
stops

Wireless capsule
endoscopy after
patient stabilized

G Consider:

Selective
arteriography

F Consider:
F Consider:

Colonoscopy

Elective
colonoscopy

