GENERALIZED PRURITUS
Pruritus is an unpleasant sensation that provokes the desire to scratch. In at least half of cases when the workup is
concluded, one is left with a diagnosis of idiopathic. It is frequently multifactorial. In the elderly, xerosis is common and
careful attention to moisturization may reduce symptoms
whether pruritus is idiopathic (common) or caused by systemic
illness. Regardless of the underlying cause, most patients
have maximal itching at bedtime. There are many pruritic
dermatoses, but relatively few of these cause generalized itching. Generalized pruritus can be divided into conditions in
which there is an associated dermatosis and those in which
pruritus is a symptom of a noncutaneous disease.
A. Physical examination alone is sufficient to diagnose
most primary cutaneous pruritic diseases. In the absence of an obvious primary lesion, a medical history
may uncover occult dermatoses. For example, xerotic
(dry) skin often itches just after bathing. Scabies may
affect multiple household members and can be a venereally transmitted condition. Atopic dermatitis often
appears in successive generations and is associated
with asthma and allergic rhinitis.
B. The two most common causes of generalized pruritus
are xerosis and atopic dermatitis. Xerosis is most prominent on the anterior legs and lateral arms. The plaques
have fine fissures that look like a cracked pot (“erythema
craquele”). The lesions of atopic dermatitis are thickened (lichenified) and excoriated. Occasionally patients
with a psychosis will pick or scratch themselves and may
bring a “sample” of “parasites” removed from the skin to
the visit. On careful examination these are negative.
C. Diagnosis often can be confirmed by a skin biopsy. If
scabies is suspected, examine the superficial contents
of a burrow by performing a skin scraping.
D. Xerosis results in a dull appearance of the skin, with
mild flakiness or scaling. It frequently coexists with
other problems, particularly in the elderly. Also consider irritant or allergic contact dermatitis in this
group. Causes include topical alcohol, harsh soap, wool
clothing, detergent, and fabric softeners.
E. In the absence of an obvious cutaneous cause of generalized pruritus, empirically treat for xerosis with
moisturizers. If the pruritus persists, a laboratory workup is indicated and should include a hemogram, serum

120

F.

G.

H.
I.
J.

K.

L.

chemistries, glucose tolerance test, thyroid function
studies, urinalysis, and chest radiography.
Pruritus rarely predates the diagnosis of systemic malignancy, except in Hodgkin’s disease, where 6% of
cases present with pruritus alone. If after a routine
workup there are no localizing signs of malignancy,
further evaluation usually is not indicated.
Polycythemia vera is associated with pruritus after
quick temperature change (e.g., bathing). Itching occurs commonly in leukemia and rarely in iron deficiency states, even in the absence of other signs and
symptoms.
Pruritus often is the first symptom of biliary cirrhosis
and extrahepatic biliary obstruction. An elevated serum alkaline phosphatase level is characteristic.
The pruritus of diabetes mellitus occurs in !5% of
patients and is not correlated with disease severity.
Hyperthyroidism may produce generalized pruritus
that improves when the patient becomes euthyroid.
Most cases of pruritus with hypothyroidism are secondary to xerosis.
Chronic renal failure commonly produces generalized
pruritus in patients with BUN "50 mg/dl. Dialysis may
produce paroxysms of intense itching. Phototherapy
with ultraviolet B (UVB) may relieve itching in these
patients.
Although psychogenic pruritus is a common cause of
itching, consider it only after all other causes have
been ruled out.

References
Bergasa NV, Jones EA. The pruritus of cholestasis. Semin Liver Dis 1993;
13:319.
Bolognia J, Jorizza J, Rapine R. Dermatology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2007.
Denman ST. A review of pruritus. J Am Acad Dermatol 1986;14:375.
Greaves MW. New pathophysiological and clinical insights into pruritus.
J Dermatol 1993;29:735.
Kantor GR, Lookingbill DP. Generalized pruritus and systemic disease.
J Am Acad Dermatol 1983;9:375.
Levine N. “Winter itch”: what’s causing this rash? Geriatrics 1996;
51:20.
Lober CW. Pruritus and malignancy. Clin Dermatol 1993;11:125.
Martin J. Pruritus. Int J Dermatol 1985;24:634.
Wolff K, Goldsmith LA, Katz SI, et al: Fitzpatrick’s Dermatology in General Medicine, 7th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2007.

121
Patient with GENERALIZED PRURITUS

A History

Physical examination

No skin lesions

Skin lesions

E Diagnostic tests

B Consider:

Xerosis (dry skin)
Atopic dermatitis
Scabies
Dermatitis herpetiformis
Drug eruption
Fiberglass dermatitis
Urticaria
Mycosis fungoides
Delusions of parasitosis

C

D Xerosis

Irritant induced
Allergic contact
dermatitis

Diagnostic Tests:
Skin Biopsy
Scabies Preparation
Urticaria Workup (p 118)

Chest radiography

Hemogram

Glucose tolerance
test

Thyroid function
tests

Complete laboratory
profile

Abnormal

Abnormal

Abnormal

Abnormal

Normal

G Consider:
F Consider:

Hodgkin’s
disease
Carcinoma

L Consider:

Polycythemia
vera
Leukemia
Myeloma
Iron deficiency

I Diabetes
mellitus

J Consider:

Thyrotoxicosis
Hypothyroidism

Liver function panel

BUN/creatinine

Abnormal

Abnormal

H Consider:

Biliary cirrhosis
Drug-related condition
Biliary obstruction

K Renal failure

Psychogenic
pruritus
Drug reaction
Carcinoma

