GERIATRIC FUNCTIONAL ASSESSMENT

The functional assessment is an integral part of a comprehensive geriatric assessment, the purpose of which is to
promote wellness and independence and to improve the
quality of life. A correct assessment of level of care and
adequate assistance plays an integral part in decreasing, or
preventing, admissions to the hospital; improving the quality of care for the elderly; and delaying, or even avoiding,
unnecessary nursing home placement.
A. Physical Assessment
Nutritional Assessment: The nutritional assessment
starts with a visual inspection of the patient, a calculation of body mass index (BMI), and a careful history to
rule out weight loss. A BMI of !20 and a history of
significant weight loss warrant further evaluation (see
the chapter Involuntary Weight Loss). The differential
of the geriatric patient who is malnourished should
include not only medical etiologies but also depression
or other psychiatric disorders, financial problems, or
impairment in activities of daily living (ADLs), such as
an inability to cook for oneself.
Visual Assessment: Often patients are unaware that
they are experiencing deficits in vision, and, as such, a
quick visual assessment should be performed on every
patient. An easy way to assess vision is to have a patient
read a paragraph from a newspaper or periodical. The
patient can be evaluated further by the Snellen chart
or Jaeger card. The cause for visual impairment should
be found and treated accordingly. Cataracts, glaucoma,
macular degeneration. and abnormalities of accommodation worsen with age.
Hearing Assessment: Hearing loss is common in
older adults and is often overlooked. If left untreated,
it can cause social withdrawal and depression. As such,
a hearing assessment is an integral part of the physical
assessment. Before a quick hearing evaluation, otoscopic examination should be done to rule out cerumen impaction. The examiner should then whisper a
short, easily answered question in each ear while the
examiner’s face is out of direct view. Not acknowledging the question warrants further evaluation. The majority of hearing loss is categorized as presbycusis
(“older hearing”)—sensorineural, usually symmetric
hearing loss. Many persons with presbycusis can be
helped by amplification, usually hearing aids.
Functional Status Assessment: An assessment of
functional status includes an evaluation of ADLs and
mobility, which are a direct reflection of a geriatric
patient’s capacity to live independently. ADLs are
50

characterized as basic or instrumental. Examples of
basic ADLs include bathing, dressing, grooming, feeding, transferring from bed to chair, and toileting. Instrumental ADLs include using the telephone, preparing meals, managing household finances, taking
medications properly, shopping, managing transportation, doing laundry, and doing housework. A cognitively impaired patient and with impairment in instrumental ADLs may require supervision of only
medication intake and finances. Impairment in multiple basic ADLs requires more assistance, either
through family/financial supports or through placement to a skilled nursing facility. If there is a deficit in
bathing alone, a home health aid may suffice.
The information about basic and instrumental ADLs
is usually provided by the patient or an informant (especially in the case of a patient who is cognitively impaired), so a thorough history is imperative. Questions
about mobility should be asked, including the patient’s
ability to climb stairs, walk from room to room, and
walk outside of the house. A great amount of information can also be gleaned by simply observing the patient
during the office visit. A patient’s capacity to unbutton
and button a shirt or blouse, write a sentence with a
pen, or take off and put on shoes are simple actions that
give the physician a wealth of information. When
searching for indications that the patient may have
some impairment in mobility, look to see whether the
patient has difficulty touching the back of the head with
both hands or struggles to climb up and down from the
examination table.
If impairment in mobility is suspected, the physician
can further explore by conducting performance-based
testing of functional status, which, in the outpatient
setting, is focused on gait, balance, and transfers. The
patient is asked to stand from the seated position in a
hard-backed chair while keeping his or her arms
folded. An inability to complete this task suggests a
lower extremity (quadriceps) weakness and is highly
predictive of future disability. Once standing, the patient should be observed to walk back and forth over a
short distance with his or her usual walking aid. Abnormalities of gait include path deviation; diminished step
height or length; trips, slips, or near falls; and difficulty
with turning.
Fall risk can be evaluated quickly by the “Get Up
and Go” test. The test is performed by asking the patient to rise from a chair; walk 10 feet 3 meters; turn
around; and, on returning to the chair, turn and sit
(Continued on page 52)

51
Patient for FUNCTIONAL ASSESSMENT

A Physical

Nutrition

Vision

ADLs

Basic:
Bathing
Dressing
Grooming
Feeding
Transferring
Toileting

Cont’d on p 53

Hearing

Observation

Functional
status

Performance-based
assessment

Instrumental:
Using the telephone
Preparing meals
Managing finances
Taking medications
Shopping
Managing transportation
Doing laundry
Doing housework

Mobility:
Walking from room to room
Climbing a flight of stairs
Walking outside one’s home

52
back down in the chair. Patients who take "10 seconds
to complete this sequence have increased risk for falls.
Those taking 10–19 seconds are considered to be fairly
mobile; those taking 20–29 seconds are considered to
have variable mobility; and those taking #30 seconds
are considered to be dependent in balance and mobility. Patients with impaired gait and balance should be
evaluated further to determine the cause and should
be referred for gait evaluation and training to a physical therapist.
B. Cognitive Assessment
Because of the high prevalence of dementia, screening
for cognitive impairment is very important. Cognitive
impairment should always be explored in the functionally impaired geriatric patient with or without abnormalities in physical functioning. Because a comprehensive cognitive evaluation is time consuming, it
should be reserved for patients who are at risk or show
any signs of dementia.
A quick assessment such as three-word recall after
1 minute should be done to assess the need for further
evaluation. If recall is impaired, then the patient
should be scheduled for comprehensive evaluation to
rule out dementia (see Chronic Behavior Change).
C. Psychological Assessment
Depression is known to be underdiagnosed. If left
untreated, it can cause significant impairment in functional abilities, including cognitive abilities (pseudodementia), and thus needs to be differentiated from
dementia. A positive answer to the question, “Do you
often feel sad and depressed?” warrants further exploration (a geriatric depression scale can be used).
D. Social Assessment
An assessment of the patient’s living environment, family and social supports, and financial well-being is an
integral part of formulating a comprehensive treatment
plan in the geriatric patient. The physician will need the
help of social workers in providing information about
available resources to the family, such as adult day care
centers or assisted-living/skilled nursing facilities, especially if significant functional impairment is found. In
cases of suspected elder mistreatment or caregivers being overburdened, social workers prove to be invaluable.

Visiting nurses may be helpful in assessing home safety.
Advance directives should be clarified.
E. Evaluation of Driving Skills
Cessation of driving is often perceived as a loss of independence, and many patients are reluctant to make
this decision. The accident rates in older drivers are
equivalent to those of drivers between the ages of 16
and 24 years. Risk factors for impaired driving include
reduced vision; dementia; impaired neck and truck
rotation; limitations in shoulders, hips, or ankles; foot
abnormalities; poor motor coordination; medications;
and alcohol abuse or dependence.
Effectively communicating with the patient and the
family, by explaining risk factors, providing statistics,
and helping to find alternative means of transportation,
can often avert conflict.
For those geriatric patients who are capable of
driving, it is appropriate to recommend against driving on highways, especially during busy periods; driving at night; and driving in poor weather. The clock
drawing test appears to be a useful tool to screen for
driving performance and to support the recommendation for a formal driving assessment.
The physician has an ethical obligation to notify the
Department of Motor Vehicles when a patient who is
clearly impaired insists on continuing to drive. The
practitioner should be familiar with license renewal
laws, mandatory physician reporting laws, and voluntary reporting laws. These vary from state to state.
References
Comprehensive Geriatric Assessment. The Merck Manual of Geriatrics,
2005. Section 1. Chapter 4. Accessed September 24, 2007 at http://
www.merck.com/mkgr/mmg/sec2/ch20/ch20a.jsp.
Freund B. Clock drawing test tracks progression of driving performance
in cognitively impaired older adults. Case comparisons. Clin Geriatr
2004;12(7):33–36.
Gill TM. Assessment. In Cobbs EL, Duthie EH, Murphy JB, eds. Geriatrics Review Syllabus, 5th ed. New York: Blackwell Publishing,
2002–2004:49–54.
Reuben DB. Comprehensive geriatric assessment and systems approaches to geriatric care. In Cassel CK, Leipzig RM, Cohen HJ, et al
eds. Geriatric Medicine, 4th ed. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2003:195–
203.

53
Patient for FUNCTIONAL ASSESSMENT
(Cont’d from p 51)

B Cognitive
Quick assessment
test

C Psychological

D Social

E Older driver
Risk factors

