GRIEF


A. Normal grief responses vary. The process of grieving
may be seen as occurring in three stages: initial shock
or numbing, acute mourning, and a period of resolution or recovery. A lack of perceived social support is
one predictor of difficulty in recovery. Those seen as
grieving most intensely early in the bereavement may
have a poorer outcome after 1 year than those with a
relative absence of mourning. There is little evidence
to support the efficacy of treatment for people experiencing uncomplicated bereavement.
B. Neurovegetative symptoms of depression are common
in bereavement. Sleep disturbance may last for up to
1 year. Appetite usually returns within 4 months after
the loss. However, motor retardation, ruminative guilt,
and a feeling of worthlessness are not typical symptoms
of bereavement and suggest the need for psychiatric
evaluation and treatment.
C. Symptoms of complicated grief are distinct from symptoms of bereavement-related depression and anxiety.
Persistent symptoms of anxiety and depression warrant
a more detailed psychiatric evaluation. Patients who
are clinically depressed are most often treated with a
combination of antidepressant medication and psychotherapy.
D. More than 40% of bereaved spouses have at least
one type of anxiety disorder during the first year of
bereavement. A history of anxiety disorder is a strong
predictor of its presenting during bereavement. Anxiety
symptoms include somatic distress, obsessions and
compulsions, phobias, and panic attacks.
E. Antidepressants are useful in the treatment of most
anxiety disorders and may be preferred to benzodiazepines because of the lack of dependence potential.
F. A history of an addictive disorder is a strong predictor
of substance abuse during grieving. Because there
is a significant risk of morbidity and mortality with
substance abuse, it is imperative that a careful history
be taken and that bothersome symptoms of anxiety and
sleeplessness be treated nonpharmacologically or with
medications that have minimal addiction potential.

670

G. In normal grief the intensity of the emotional pain
gradually decreases; significant resolution occurs by
1 year. Theories of attachment behavior have been
used to explain the difficulties that complicate the
grieving process for some people (Table 1).
H. It is suggested that expressive psychotherapy is most
appropriate for conflicted grief syndromes, cognitive
treatment may be particularly useful for dependent
grief syndrome, and treatments developed specifically
for persons with posttraumatic stress disorder may
be most useful for those who have had a sudden, unexpected loss.
Table 1 Pathologic Grief Syndromes
Dependent

A stable sense of self depends on presence of the
lost person
Unexpected loss A posttraumatic stress syndrome with hyperreactivity, intrusive memories, and nightmares alternating
with affect constriction and numbing
Conflicted
Ambivalence toward the lost person is unacceptable,
and the grieving person turns the negative feelings
on himself or herself

References
Boelen Paul A, van den Bout J. Complicated grief, depression, and
anxiety as distinct postloss syndromes: a confirmatory factor analysis
study. Am J Psychiatry 2005;162:2175.
Clayton PJ. Bereavement and depression. J Clin Psychiatry 1990;
51(Suppl):34.
Crow HE. How to help patients understand and conquer grief: avoiding
depression in the midst of sadness. Postgrad Med 1991;89:117.
Kim K, Jacobs S. Pathologic grief and its relationship to other psychiatric
disorders. J Affect Disord 1991;21:257.
Middleton W. Bereavement. Psychiatr Clin North Am 1987;10:329.
Rosenzweig A, Prigerson H, Miller MD, et al. Bereavement and late-life
depression: grief and its complications in the elderly. Annu Rev Med
1997;48:421.
Rynearson EK. Psychotherapy of pathologic grief. Psychiatr Clin North
Am 1987;10:487.
Zisook S. Anxiety and bereavement. Psychiatr Med 1990;8:83.
Zisook S, Schuchter SR, Sledge PA, et al. The spectrum of depressive
phenomena after spousal bereavement. J Clin Psychiatry
1994;55(Suppl):29.

671
Patient Has Experienced SIGNIFICANT LOSS
History

A Normal
grief

B Depressed

D Anxiety

mood

Assess symptoms

C Clinical

depression

Antidepressants
Psychotherapy

F Psychoactive
drug use

Assess
symptoms

Normal
grief

E

Assess
use

Anxiety
disorders

Addictive
disorder

Pharmacotherapy
Behavioral
Therapy

Limit
prescriptions
Education,
Alcoholics
Anonymous

Unresolved
grief
Relationship
history

G Pathologic
grief
syndrome

H Psychotherapy

