GYNECOMASTIA

Gynecomastia refers to enlargement of glandular breast
tissue behind the male nipple. The breast tissue usually
hypertrophies in response to an absolute or apparent excess
of estrogen or a deficiency of androgen. These levels may
be affected by changes in the function of the adrenal gland
or testes, conversion of estrogens in tissues such as adipose,
the circulating level of sex-hormone–binding globulin, or
tissue-specific sensitivity to hormonal stimulation.
A. If the patient is an adolescent or young adult, then pubertal gynecomastia is the most likely etiology. Transient
imbalances in the ratio of estrogen to androgen during
puberty can result in erratic and asymmetric breast development in boys. These changes may persist to adulthood. As the ratio of adipose to muscle increases with
age, the increased peripheral conversion of androgens
to estrogens may trigger the onset of gynecomastia de
novo. Germ cell tumors of the testis, prevalent in this
age group, should be excluded and the patients reexamined for stability in 6 months.
B. Testicular neoplasms often secrete human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) that interferes with normal testicular
androgen production and increases the conversion of
androgen to estrogen. Gynecomastia in these patients is
a poor prognostic sign. In patients in whom further
investigation of gynecomastia is warranted, levels of
luteinizing hormone (LH), testosterone (T), estradiol
(E2), and hCG should be determined.
C. Drugs are commonly implicated in the etiology of
gynecomastia. Gynecomastia should not be unexpected
when treating patients with antiandrogens or estrogens. Some drugs have an intrinsic estrogenic activity;
others, such as chemotherapeutic agents and drugs of
abuse (especially marijuana and heroin), interfere with
normal androgen production in the testes or centrally.
Spironolactone is an antiandrogen and increases the
conversion of androgen to estrogen. Similar changes
are not noted with eplerenone, a newer aldosterone
antagonist. Alcohol, antituberculous agents, and H2
receptor antagonists (such as cimetidine or ranitidine)
have also been implicated as etiologic agents in causing
gynecomastia.
D. Other systemic causes should be considered in patients
not taking contributing drugs, who are beyond puberty,
and have testicular neoplasm excluded. Malnutrition
induces a central hypogonadism that does not affect

162

adrenal estrogen production. Cirrhosis is associated
with an increase in the adrenal production of estrogen
precursors and increased conversion to estrogen.
E. Endocrine causes of gynecomastia include central hypogonadism, testicular failure, hyperthyroidism, feminizing adrenal tumors, and true hermaphroditism. The
etiology and investigation of primary and secondary
hypogonadism are presented in standard endocrinology texts. Hyperthyroidism is associated with an increase in the concentration of sex-hormone–binding
globulin, and a shift in the androgen-to-estrogen ratio.
A feminizing adrenal tumor-can produce large amounts
of estrogen. Patients with true hermaphroditism who
have functioning ovarian tissue may similarly present
with gynecomastia.
F. Most patients with gynecomastia require no therapy
other than the removal of the inciting cause, if identified. Even if the cause is not identified, spontaneous
regression occurs in up to 85% of cases, particularly in
younger men. Therapy is indicated in cases where the
gynecomastia causes sufficient pain, embarrassment, or
distress to interfere with daily life. Surgery remains the
mainstay of treatment, because gynecomastia of long
duration becomes fibrosed and unresponsive to medical
treatment. When onset is recent, medical therapy may
be useful. Several drugs have been tried for gynecomastia, including the antiestrogens tamoxifen and
clomiphene, the aromatase inhibitor testolactone, and
danazol, a weak androgen that inhibits gonadotropin
secretion. Treatment with dihydrotestosterone, which
cannot be aromatized to estrogen, is reported to provide symptomatic improvement. Prophylactic radiation
to the breasts can be used where gynecomastia can be
predicted, such as when treating prostate cancer
patients with estrogens.
References
Bembo SA, Carlson HE. Gynecomastia: its features, and when and how
to treat it. Cleve Clin J Med 2004;71(6):511–517.
Braunstein GD. Gynecomastia. N Engl J Med 1993;328:490–495.
Daniels IR, Layer GT. Gynaecomastia. Eur J Surg 2001;167(12):
885–892.
De Sanctis V, Bernasconi S, Bona G, et al. Pubertal gynecomastia.
Minerva Pediatr 2002;54(4):357–361.
Glass AR. Gynecomastia. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 1994;23(4):
825–837.
Neuman JF. Evaluation and treatment of gynecomastia. Am Fam
Physician 1997;55(5):1835–1844, 1849–1850.

163
Male Patient with GYNECOMASTIA

A Etiology
B Measure serum hCG, LH, T, E2*

C Drugs

D Systemic
E

F Treatment

causes
Endocrine
causes

↑ hCG

↑ LH, ↓ T

↓ or normal LH, ↓ T

↑ LH, ↑ T

↑ E2, ↓ or normal LH

Normal

Testicular
ultrasonography

Primary
hypogonadism

Measure serum
prolactin

Measure thyroxine,
TSH

Testicular
ultrasonography

Idiopathic
gynecomastia

Mass
Testicular
germ cell
tumor

Normal
Extragonadal
germ cell
tumor
or
hCG-secreting
nontrophoblastic
neoplasm
Chest film
Abdominal CT

*Modified from Braunstein.

Elevated
Probable
prolactinsecreting
pituitary
tumor

Normal

Normal

↑ Thyroxine,
↓ TSH

Secondary
hypogonadism
Hyperthyroidism

Mass

Normal

Leydig
Adrenal CT or MRI
or
Sertoli
cell tumor

Androgen
resistance

Mass

Normal

Adrenal
neoplasm

Increased
extraglandular
aromatase
activity

