A. With significant trauma, consider fracture or dislocation and begin assessment with radiography. Fracture of the distal radius (Colles' fracture) is a common complication of falls in patients with osteoporosis.
B. Articular involvement is suggested by swelling and/or tenderness over joints rather than between them and by similar degrees of pain with active and passive movement. Further workup of hand/wrist arthritis depends on acuity and the number of joints involved, in the hand/wrist and elsewhere.
C. Polyarthritis of the hand joints includes noninflammatory (osteoarthritis [OA]) and inflammatory (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis [RA], lupus, psoriatic arthritis) causes. OA affects the distal interphalangeal (DIP), proximal interphalangeal (PIP), and first carpometacarpal (CMC) joints. Wrist OA is uncommon in the absence of a history of acute or chronic trauma, and OA of the metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joints should raise suspicion for an underlying metabolic cause, such as hemochromatosis, hyperparathyroidism, or calcium pyrophosphate deposition disease (CPPD). Polyarticular gout can be either chronic (usually with asymmetrically distributed tophi detectable) or, less commonly, acute, but in both cases there is usually a prior history of monoarticular attacks in the great toe or midfoot. RA involves the metatarsal-phalangeals, PIP joints, and wrists in a symmetric distribution, and it seldom involves the DIP joints. Psoriatic arthritis can present like RA but more commonly is asymmetric and commonly involves the DIP joints. Suspicion for infection is low in a polyarticular presentation, so joint aspiration is indicated only to confirm suspected cases of acute gout. Radiography is often helpful in making the diagnosis and in assessing the degree of joint damage.
D. Monoarthritis requires consideration of infection and usually merits joint aspiration. Infection is much less common in the finger joints than in the wrist. Crystal disease often presents as monoarthritis, particularly in acute attacks of gout or pseudogout (acute inflammation associated with release of crystals formed during chronic CPPD disease). OA uncommonly presents as monoarthritis except after trauma. Among inflammatory arthritides, psoriatic arthritis and postinfectious reactive arthritis are the most likely to present as monoarthritis, with or without accompanying tenosynovitis.
E. Extraarticular disease is suggested by point tenderness over tendons or nodules and by pain greater with active/resisted than with passive motion. Tendon rupture features severe restriction on active movement of the affected finger. Tendonitis of the abductor pollicis tendon (de Quervain's tenosynovitis) is particularly common, and examination features local tenderness and pain with the Finkelstein test (passive medial displacement of the wrist while the thumb is tucked inside the fist). A flexor tendon nodule presents as a “trigger finger,” with the bent finger transiently stuck in flexion of the PIP and DIP joints (reducible, with associated pain) and often with a tender nodule palpable over the palmar surface of the MCP joint. Ganglions and synovial cysts are common causes of focal swelling, with or without tenderness. Dupuytren's contracture is a chronic contracture of the palmar fascia associated with the fourth and fifth digits and has a strong genetic predisposition. People with diabetes often develop thickening, with or without contracture, of the palmar skin more diffusely and less severely.
F. Vascular disease from atherosclerosis is less common in the hand than in the foot, but vasospastic disease in association with cold exposure (Raynaud's phenomenon) is more common. When associated with underlying connective tissue disease, particularly scleroderma, Raynaud's phenomenon can be severe and threaten digital infarction and gangrene. Embolic disease and vasculitis must be considered in acute compromise of the circulation to the fingers.
G. Polyneuropathy usually presents symmetrically and with more severe disease in the feet than in the hands. Mononeuritis multiplex reflects damage, often from vasculitis, to peripheral nerves and usually begins in an asymmetric manner affecting multiple limbs. Compression of the median nerve in the carpal tunnel is common and presents with pain in the hand (often radiating), loss of sensation in the distribution of the median nerve (palmar aspect of the lateral three fingers and lateral palm), and weakness and atrophy of the thenar and hypothenar muscles. Chronic compression of the ulnar nerve leads to pain and sensory loss involving the lateral two fingers. Compression of the radial nerve, cervical nerve roots, and brachial plexus is a less common neurologic cause of isolated hand and wrist pain. Nerve conduction studies are often helpful in definitively diagnosing nerve compression and may be essential for diagnosing mononeuritis multiplex.
H. Thickening of the skin, particularly if the thickening is worse distally, should raise concern for scleroderma. A history of Raynaud's phenomenon is almost always obtained. Clubbing of the fingers should alert one to the development of hypertrophic osteoarthropathy (HOA), a painful bony enlargement of the distal extremities. Clubbing is associated with several chronic diseases, but severe HOA is particularly associated with lung cancer.

