HEARING LOSS

More than 28 million Americans have some form of hearing
loss. Approximately 50% of the 16 million Americans who
are hearing impaired are !65 years old. Hearing loss can be
acute, gradual, permanent, or temporary and requires a
thorough history and physical examination. Hearing loss can
be conductive when sound is impeded through the external
ear, middle ear, or both; sensorineural with problems in the
cochlea or neural pathway to the auditory cortex; or mixed.
A. History should include questions regarding physical
trauma; barotrauma; deafness; exposure to ototoxins;
medications; recent upper respiratory infection; and associated symptoms such as otalgia, tinnitus, or vertigo.
B. Examination of the ear includes otoscopy to look for
otitis externa, foreign body, cerumen impaction, canal
cholesteatoma, exostosis (osteochondroma), tympanic
membrane perforation, and effusions (hemorrhagic,
purulent, or serous). Perform Weber’s test by placing a
tuning fork on the central forehead. Lateralization of
the sound to one ear is consistent with either a conductive defect of the affected ear or a sensorineural defect
of the opposite ear. No lateralization indicates either a
normal result or bilaterally symmetric sensorineural or
conductive defects. Perform Rinne’s test by placing the
handle of a vibrating tuning fork against the mastoid
process and having the patient signal when he or she
can no longer hear it. Then hold the vibrating tines
near the ear and have the patient signal when sound is
no longer audible. Normally air conduction persists
twice as long as bone conduction but not in a conductive hearing loss.
C. Hearing evaluation includes audiography (pure tone
testing of air and bone thresholds), speech reception
and discrimination, and acoustic impedance. In sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) both air and bone thresholds are depressed compared with normal. In conductive hearing loss the bone conduction threshold is
greater than air conduction thresholds. In mixed deficits air conduction, both are depressed.
D. SNHL is a lesion in the organ of Corti or in the central
pathways, including the eighth nerve and auditory cortex. It may be the result of an inherited disorder or congenital abnormality, or it may be an acquired deficit.

40

E. Hereditary loss can be present at birth or can present
when the patient is a young adult. Family history is
key.
F. Congenital hearing loss occurs at or shortly after birth.
It may result from viral infections during pregnancy
(e.g., cytomegalovirus [CMV], rubella, and mumps),
maternal hypothyroidism, birth anoxia, exposure to
fetal ototoxins, Rh incompatibility, or other causes. It
also may occur as a hereditary autosomal disorder.
G. Sudden-onset SNHL is of variable severity and develops in <3 days. Profound loss is associated with poor
prognosis for recovery.
H. Trauma and sudden loss suggest a temporal fracture. A
longitudinal fracture results in middle ear damage and
is associated with a conductive hearing loss. Transverse
fracture may damage the facial nerve and labyrinth and
result in a sensorineural deficit. Both require a referral
to ENT (an ear, nose, and throat specialist). Concussion alone may result in a temporary SNHL as a result
of acoustic trauma.
I. Treatment of sudden-onset SNHL is directed at the
underlying disorder. In the past when the cause was not
found, bed rest, head elevation, avoidance of loud
noise, and steroids were prescribed. Controlled studies
of steroid therapy for idiopathic sudden-onset hearing
loss show a statistically significant improvement in
hearing with steroids (up to 44% response). Sudden
idiopathic sensorineural hearing loss is an urgent situation and requires consultation. Heavy lifting may result
in a leak of inner ear fluid from a membranous rupture
at the oval or round windows, leading to hearing loss
and vestibular symptoms. Refer to ENT for repair.
J. Infectious causes for sudden onset of SNHL include
suppurative labyrinthitis from otitis media or mastoiditis
and viral infections (mumps, CMV, Epstein-Barr virus,
rubella, rubeola, herpes zoster, and herpes simplex).
K. Vascular causes include vertebrobasilar insufficiency,
embolism, hypercoagulable states, and basilar migraines.
L. Some medications cause sudden-onset hearing loss.
Hearing loss from loop diuretics and aminoglycosides
is usually reversible. Salicylate withdrawal results in
improved hearing in most patients.
(Continued on page 42)

41
Patient with HEARING LOSS

A History
B Physical examination

Otoscopy

Abnormal

Normal

Abnormal
tympanic
membrane

Infection

Cerumen impaction
or foreign body

Treat

Remove

C Formal hearing evaluation
D Sensorineural
hearing loss

E Hereditary F Congenital

Mixed

Conductive

Cont’d on p 43

Cont’d on p 43

Acquired

by family
history

G Sudden

Progressive
Cont’d on p 43

H Trauma

I Idiopathic

J Infection

K Vascular

L Toxin or

medication
induced

42
M. Acquired causes include metabolic disorders, vascular
insufficiency, autoimmune disease, infection, degenerative disorder, and neoplasm. Although the most common
cause of hearing loss in the elderly is presbycusis, a symmetric, progressive decrease in hearing, it is a diagnosis
of exclusion. Workup for bilateral progressive SNHL includes an evaluation for diabetes mellitus, hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism, anemia, hyperlipidemia, renal
disease, infection, and syphilis. Review exposures to
medications that are commonly known to cause hearing
loss such as aminoglycosides, loop diuretics, and salicylates and others such as quinine, chloroquine, and antineoplastics such as cisplatinum. Autoimmune SNHL
without systemic symptoms has occurred and the evaluation should include ANCA (antineutrophil cytoplasmic
antibody); ANA; RF (rheumatoid factor); antibodies to
cyclic citrullinated peptides (anti-CCP); antibodies todouble-stranded DNA; antibodies to extractable nuclear
antigens (i.e., anti-Smith, anti-Ro/SSA, anti-La/SSB, and
anti-RNP); cryoglobulins; and complement components
(C3 and C4) to look for Cogan’s syndrome, giant cell arteritis, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), polyarteritis
nodosum, and Wegner’s granulomatosis. Neoplasms such
as acoustic neuromas and metastatic carcinoma of the
breast, prostate, and kidney can result in SNHL. Acoustic neuromas can present with bilateral hearing loss in up
to 22% of the cases. Diagnosis is by MRI with contrast.
Degenerative disorders include presbycusis, noise-induced hearing loss, and Meniere’s disease.
Therapy is aimed at the underlying cause: removal
of the offending drug; treatment of the autoimmune
disorder; a trial of steroids of idiopathic sudden SNHL;
surgery, radiation, or chemotherapy for a neoplasm;
surgical repair of a membrane rupture; and antibiotics
and steroids for syphilis. Acoustic trauma requires surgical evaluation, whereas hearing aids are the treatment of choice for presbycusis and disorders not improved by medical or surgical intervention.
N. Unilateral hearing loss is more commonly associated
with trauma, which may result from temporal bone
injuries or rupture of the membranes with perilymph
leaking into the middle ear. The trauma may be as mild
as a sneeze, straining, or lifting. Meniere’s disease may
also cause a unilateral hearing loss. Progressive SNHL
that is unilateral or asymmetric requires auditory brainstem response (ABR) testing to localize abnormalities
in the retro cochlear lesion. MRI has a higher sensitivity of acoustic neuromas "15 mm than does a highresolution CT scan. Posterior fossa meningioma and
primary cholesteatoma are other masses that cause
progressive SNHL in the retrocochlear area. Treatment of acoustic neuromas depends on the size of the
tumor, cranial nerve involvement, and the patient’s
preoperative state. Radiation therapy is used for patients who are not surgical candidates. If ABR testing
does not reveal an abnormality, continue surveillance
of patients with asymmetric SNHL. Consider MRI.

O. Patients with chronic otitis media, tuberculosis, otosclerosis, skull fractures, and penetrating injury of the ear;
Wegener’s granulomatosis; and squamous cell carcinoma all have been observed to have a mixed conductive and sensorineural deficit in advanced disease.
P. Conductive hearing loss, defined as a lesion involving
the outer and middle ear to the level of the oval
window, results from mechanical disruption of the
transmitted sound through the external auditory canal,
tympanic membrane, and ossicle.
Q. Direct observation of the external canal during the
examination allows evaluation of conditions causing
mechanical disruption: atresias of the external canal,
cerumen impaction, exostosis, foreign bodies, canal
cholesteatoma, external otitis, tympanic membrane
perforation or sclerosis, effusions, and ossicular damage. Multiple perforations of the tympanic membrane
suggest tuberculous infection of the middle ear. Barotrauma resulting from unequal air pressure in the external auditory canal can result in an effusion and a
temporary conductive loss.
R. Acoustic stapedius reflex testing for fixation of the stapedius is part of the evaluation of conductive hearing
loss. Otosclerosis, the most common congenital form
of conductive hearing loss, is diagnosed with this test
and treated with stapedectomy.
S. Cholesteatoma, glomus tumor, and nasopharyngeal
malignancies (squamous cell carcinoma, adenocarcinomas, and basal cell carcinomas) can produce conductive hearing loss. High-resolution CT of the temporal
bones is the study of choice to evaluate masses in the
middle ear. Therapy of the underlying problem may
improve the conductive hearing loss: removal of the
foreign body or cerumen, antituberculous drugs, tympanoplasty, ossiculoplasty, stapedectomy, and removal
of excessive cartilage (exostosis). Treatments of masses
within the middle ear depend on the site, pathologic
condition, and preoperative evaluation of the patient.
Referral to ENT is required.

References
Arts HA. Differential diagnosis of sensorineural hearing loss. In Cummings CW, Fredrickson JM, Harker LA, et al, eds. Otolaryngology:
Head and Neck Surgery, 4th ed. St. Louis: Mosby, 1998.
Backous D, Niparko J. Differential diagnosis of conductive hearing loss.
In Cummings CW, Fredrickson JM, Harker LA, et al, eds. Otolaryngology: Head and Neck Surgery, 4th ed. St. Louis: Mosby, 1998.
Grandis JR, Hirsch BE, Wagener MM. Treatment of idiopathic sudden
sensorineural hearing loss. Am J Otol 1993;1:183.
Isaacson JE, Vora NM. Differential diagnosis of hearing loss. Am Fam
Physician 2003;68:1125.
Nadol JB. Hearing loss. N Engl J Med 1993;329:1092.
Shikowitz MJ. Sudden sensorineural hearing loss. Med Clin North Am
1991;75:1239.
Weber PC. Etiology of hearing loss in adults. Up-To-Date 2006;13:3.

43
Patient with HEARING LOSS
(Cont’d from p 41)
Formal hearing evaluation

Sensorineural
hearing loss

O Mixed

P Conductive

Trauma

No trauma

Assess for:
Penetrating
trauma
Obtain:
CT of temporal
bone

Treat underlying
disorder when
possible

Q Abnormal

acoustic
stapedius
Reflex testing

Acquired

Progressive

M Bilateral

N Unilateral

S Assess

R Assess for:
Urgent
ENT referral

Canal obstruction
Middle ear effusion
Treat

for mass

ENT
referral

ENT
referral

