HEARTBURN

A. Heartburn is the leading symptom of gastroesophageal
reflux disease (GERD). It is a substernal sensation of
burning that radiates orad and usually reflects the presence of gastric content in the esophagus.
B. Proton pump inhibitor (PPI) therapy is the most effective kind of therapy to relieve symptoms of GERD. At
the same time PPI therapy is effective in healing the
erosive esophagitis that occurs in a minority of patients
who present with heartburn.
C. Step-down treatment is a way to define the lowest level
of therapy that will provide symptom relief for a patient. The dose of PPI maybe reduced to every other
day, or an H2-receptor antagonist may be initiated.
D. The alarm symptoms and signs of GERD include dysphagia (difficulty swallowing), weight loss, and anemia.
These findings warrant immediate endoscopy to look
for complications that need prompt attention, such as
esophageal stricture, esophageal ulcer, and cancer.
E. Most patients with GERD have satisfactory symptom
control with PPI therapy; a subgroup require twicedaily dosing.
F. Maintenance PPI therapy is whatever dose of PPI that
controls the patient’s symptoms. It is often necessary
to maintain a PPI indefinitely in order to control the
symptoms and mucosal disease of the patient with
GERD. It is important to recognize that the contemporary indication for laparoscopic fundoplication is
not the failure of medical therapy but rather the
symptomatic response of the patient to a PPI. Patients who are maintained on a PPI with relief but
who still have residual regurgitation indicating volume reflux are appropriate candidates for laparoscopic fundoplication.

180

G. Initiate 24-hour pH monitoring for patients who fail
PPI twice-daily therapy. The goal is to see if there is
still abnormal distal esophagus acid exposure. The majority of patients will in fact have a normal 24-hour pH
study. However, if the duration of low pH in the distal
esophagus is still elevated, an increased dosing of the
PPI is appropriate.
H. Upper endoscopy is a consideration in any patient
with chronic heartburn. Even if the patient’s symptoms are controlled with a PPI, the duration of heartburn should be counted from the onset of reflux
symptoms through the course of PPI therapy. Patients
most likely to have Barrett’s esophagus, according to
our current understanding, include older white males
with chronic reflux. Unfortunately, we now recognize
that a significant group of patients with Barrett’s
esophagus lack reflux symptoms.

References
Chiba N, De Gara CJ, Wilkinson JM, Hunt RH. Speed of healing and
symptom relief in grade II to IV gastroesophageal reflux disease:
a meta-analysis. Gastroenterology 1997;112:1798–1810.
DeVault KR, Castell DO. Updated guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of gastroesophageal reflux disease. Am J Gastroenterol. 2005;
190:100–200.
Klinkenberg-Knol EC, Nelis F, Dent J, et al. Long-term omeprazole
treatment in resistant gastroesophageal reflux disease: efficacy, safety,
and influence on gastric mucosa. Gastroenterology 2000;118(4):
661–669.
Lundell L, Miettinen P, Myrvoid HE, et al. Continued (5-year) followup
of a randomized clinical study comparing antireflux surgery and
omeprazole in gastroesophageal reflux disease. J Am Coll Surg
2001;192:172–179.

181
Patient with HEARTBURN
History
Physical examination

D Alarm symptoms

A Typical symptoms
B

and signs

PPI
Upper Endoscopy

Relief

Failure

E

C Step-down
therapy

Infrequent
recurrence

Frequent
recurrence

Twice-Daily PPI
Therapy

Relief

Failure

Treat again

F

Maintenance
PPI

G Document reflux:
24-hr pH on PPI

Normal

Alternative
therapy

Reflux

Increase
PPI dose

H Consider upper endoscopy
for patient at high risk for
Barrett’s esophagus

