HEMATURIA

A. Microscopic hematuria is defined as !3 RBCs per
high-power microscopic field (hpf) in two of three
properly collected centrifuged urine specimens.
Urine examined should be from freshly voided,
clean-catch, midstream collections. Dipstick testing
for heme may be positive in the presence of hemoglobin from as few as 1 RBC/hpf or in the presence
of myoglobin or free hemoglobin. Any heme- positive dipstick test should be confirmed by microscopic
examination.
B. Renal function tests and a CBC with prothrombin time
(PT) and partial thromboplastin time (PTT) should be
obtained. If dipstick testing is positive for either bacteruria or pyuria, a urine culture should be sent. If an
infection is confirmed, dipstick testing to document
resolution of hematuria can be repeated at the completion of antibiotic therapy. If dipstick testing is positive
for protein, total urinary protein excretion should be
measured. The ratio of the urinary protein concentration to urinary creatinine concentration (PCR) of a
random urine sample provides an estimate of daily
protein excretion. This should be confirmed with a
24-hour urine collection. A ratio of urinary protein to
urinary creatinine "0.3 and/or a 24-hour urinary protein excretion "300 mg suggests the kidney as the
source of the microscopic hematuria. The presence of
dysmorphic red cells or red cell casts on microscopic
examination and/or abnormal renal function further
support the diagnosis of a renal parenchymal process.
C. Microscopic analysis of the urine can further distinguish
glomerular from nonglomerular bleeding (Table 1).
Red cell casts are a specific but insensitive marker of
glomerular bleeding. Small, dysmorphic red cells also
suggest a glomerular source of microscopic hematuria.
Urinary red cells with a uniform biconcave disk shape
suggest bleeding from a nonglomerular source.
D. Microscopic hematuria of glomerular origin without
proteinuria or renal insufficiency may not require renal
biopsy. The most common glomerular causes of isolated microscopic hematuria are immunoglobulin A
(IgA) nephropathy, thin basement membrane disease,
and hereditary nephritis (Alport’s syndrome). If renal
function is within the normal range and stable, a renal
biopsy may not be necessary for the management of
isolated microscopic hematuria of glomerular origin.
E. Microscopic hematuria of glomerular origin with renal
insufficiency or proteinuria warrants referral to a
nephrologist for evaluation and possible renal biopsy.
Serologic tests should be obtained; these include
ANA, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA),
362

Table 1 Causes of Microscopic Hematuria
Glomerular
Primary Glomerulonephritis
IgA nephropathy (Berger’s disease)
Poststreptococcal
Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis
Secondary Glomerulonephritis
Immune complex–associated (low C3, C4):
Lupus nephritis
Hepatitis C–associated nephritis and cryoglobulinemia
Essential mixed cryoglobulinemia
Bacterial endocarditis
Pauci-immune:
Antiglomerular basement membrane disease
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody-associated glomerulonephritis
Polyarteritis
Hereditary Causes
Hereditary nephritis (Alport’s syndrome)
Thin GBM nephropathy
Fabry’s disease
Nail-patella syndrome
Nonglomerular
Upper Urinary Tract
Renal tumors (renal cell carcinoma, angiomyolipoma, oncocytoma)
Vascular disorders (e.g., arteriovenous malformation, renal vein
thrombosis, renal arterial thrombosis with renal infarction)
Polycystic kidney disease
Systemic bleeding disorder or coagulopathy
Infection (acute or chronic pyelonephritis, renal tuberculosis)
Papillary necrosis
Lower Urinary Tract
Tumors (renal pelvis, upper ureter, bladder, urethral)
Stone or foreign body
Trauma
Indwelling catheters
Cystitis
Infectious
Drug-induced
Radiation
Prostatitis

antiglomerular basement membrane antibody (antiGBM), plasma complement (C3 and C4) levels, cryoglobulin, and hepatitis B and C.
F. Once a glomerular source of microscopic hematuria
has been ruled out, a rigorous examination of the upper and lower urinary tract for the source of bleeding
is warranted. Urothelial cancers are the most common
malignancies in patients with isolated microscopic
hematuria. Risk factors for cancer that should be borne
in mind include age "40 years, a smoking history,
occupational exposure to chemical and dyes (e.g., benzene or aromatic amines), history of analgesic abuse,
exposure to pelvic radiation, and history of gross hematuria. CT with and without IV contrast should be considered in all patients with nonglomerular hematuria.

363
Patient with HEMATURIA

A Heme-positive urine dipstick:

Confirm by microscopic examination
False positive: #3 RBCs/hpf,
free myoglobin, free hemoglobin

B Laboratory evaluation:

Renal function tests
CBC with PT, PTT
Examination of urinary sediment

Pyuria/bacteriuria:
Urine culture
Antibiotics if urinary
tract infection
Repeat dipstick at
end of treatment

Proteinuria:
Quantification of protein excretion
PCR "0.3 and/or !300 mg/24 hr
suggests glomerular origin

C Glomerular source:

RBC casts, dysmorphic RBCs

D Isolated glomerular hematuria:
Normal renal function
No proteinuria
Differential diagnosis:
IgA nephropathy, thin
basement membrane,
hereditary nephritis
Biopsy not indicated

A decision to defer the contrast component of this
study (e.g., after demonstration of urolithiasis on noncontrast CT) should be made only after careful risk
assessment for concurrent urothelial cancer and with
the expectation of close follow-up. If CT is unavailable,
excretory urography or ultrasonography are reasonable
alternatives to evaluate the upper urinary tract. Cytologic analysis of urine from three serial first-morning
specimens should be obtained. Cystoscopic evaluation
is recommended for the evaluation of microscopic hematuria in all adults "40 years and for those #40 years
with risk factors for urothelial cancer. If the patient is
#40 years and has no risk factors, cystoscopy may be
deferred. For women with isolated hematuria, urethral
and vaginal examinations should be performed to

F Nonglomerular source:

Nondysmorphic RBCs
No RBC casts
Evaluation of upper and
lower urinary tracts
CT angiography I$/I%
Urine cytology
Cystoscopy

E Glomerulonephropathy:

Renal insufficiency
Persistent proteinuria
Serologies: ANA, ANCA,
anti-GBM, cryoglobulin
C3, C4, hepatitis serologies
Referral to nephrologist
Consider renal biopsy

exclude local causes of microscopic hematuria. For
uncircumcised men, the foreskin should be retracted
to expose the glans penis for examination and urine
collection. If phimosis is present, a catheterized urinary specimen may be required.
References
Cohen RA, Brown RS. Microscopic hematuria. N Engl J Med 2003;348:
2330–2238.
Grossfeld GD, Wolf JS Jr, Litwan MS, et al. Asymptomatic microscopic
hematuria in adults: summary of the AUA best practice policy recommendations. Am Fam Physician 2001;63(6):1145–1154.
Steele DJR, Michaels PJ. Case 40-2004—a 42-year-old woman with
long-standing hematuria. N Engl J Med 2004;351:2851–2859.
Yun EJ, Meng MV, Carroll PR. Evaluation of patient with hematuria.
Med Clin North Am 2004;88(2):329–343.

