HEMOPTYSIS

Expectoration of blood from the respiratory tract,
hemoptysis, is a common medical condition best managed
through a stepwise evaluation. Hemoptysis can range from
mild blood-tinged sputum to massive, life-threatening
bleeding.
In the United States, the most common cause of hemoptysis is respiratory infection causing local trauma to airway
mucosal surfaces and resulting in blood-tinged sputum. In
the majority of cases, symptoms abate when the infection
clears. Patients with chronic respiratory infections can
develop bronchiectasis: airway dilation after recurrent
inflammation and mucous plugging. These patients usually
have chronic cough and phlegm, which can at times become
bloody. Occasionally, in severe bronchiectasis as occurs in
patients with cystic fibrosis, airways become markedly
dilated and an adjacent bronchial artery ruptures with subsequent massive hemoptysis.
Patients with hemoptysis often worry that the cause is
lung cancer. Less than 10% of patients with lung cancer
will initially present with hemoptysis; as stated earlier,
hemoptysis is much more likely to be caused by infection.
Bronchogenic carcinoma should be a consideration in any
patient with hemoptysis in the absence of infectious
symptoms. Former or active smokers are of particular
concern. Malignancies that metastasize to lung, such as
renal cell, colon, melanoma, and breast cancer, should also
be considered in proper context.
Less common etiologies include pulmonary infarction,
mitral stenosis, congestive heart failure, tuberculosis,
catamenial (menstrual), arteriovenous malformations,
coagulopathy, foreign body, and vasculitis. Up to one third
of cases of hemoptysis are “idiopathic,” and most of these
cases resolve on their own within 6 months.
A. A careful history and physical examination are imperative for evaluation. The first issue to clarify is the source
of bleeding because “pseudohemoptysis” with blood
from the nasooropharynx or GI tract can be confused
with true hemoptysis.
B. Once it is clear that blood originates from the respiratory
tract, it is important to clarify if it is a small amount of
blood mixed with purulent phlegm or more substantive
bleeding.
C. If the hemoptysis is only mild blood-streaked sputum
and the patient is an otherwise healthy nonsmoker
who is !40 years of age, a chest x-ray (CXR) to assess
for infiltrate or mass followed by further conservative

478

D.

E.

F.

G.

management is advised. If the patient has risk factors
for malignancy, a bronchoscopy is recommended to
rule out endobronchial lesions.
If frank blood is expectorated or repeated episodes of
bleeding occur, an initial workup includes CXR, CBC,
coagulation studies, and urinalysis (UA). This almost always warrants inpatient evaluation.
At this point, most patients are treated empirically for
infection, but most warrant further evaluation. The next
step is either a high-resolution chest CT or a bronchoscopy, depending on the most likely etiology for bleeding.
Bronchoscopy is most useful to look for endobronchial
masses. A high-resolution chest CT can reveal parenchymal abnormalities that could be missed by plain
CXR. In most cases, a clinician will start with one test
and if it is negative move to the other complementary
test. A word of caution: Bronchoscopic evaluation with
a normal CXR is usually low yield but deemed necessary, especially in men, smokers, those "40 years, and in
cases of bleeding lasting #1 week.
Massive hemoptysis, conservatively defined as "200 ml
in 24 hours, is a potentially life-threatening condition
that requires urgent management. Airway stabilization
is followed by evaluation for the source of bleeding.
Interventional bronchial artery angiography offers diagnostic and therapeutic options because a bleeding vessel can be embolized. However, embolization carries a
10% risk of spinal artery embolization with paralysis
and should be performed only by an experienced operator. Surgical resection is the usual alternative when
embolization is too high risk or technically impossible.
If the bleeding stops, evaluation as one would for nonmassive hemoptysis is appropriate.
In nonmassive hemoptysis, treatment is based on
presumed etiology. Most of the time, this includes treatment of infection or definitive therapy for underlying
malignancy. Recurrent nonmassive hemoptysis is also
treated with embolization or resection if conservative
management is unsuccessful.

References
Bidwell J, Pachner R. Hemoptysis diagnosis and management. Am Fam
Physician 2005;72(7):1253–1260.
Lordan JL, Gascoigne A, Corris PA. Assessment and management of
massive hemoptysis. Thorax 2003;58(9):814–819.

479
Patient with HEMOPTYSIS

A History

Physical examination
Rule out other sources:
Oropharynx
GI tract

B Quantify amount of bleeding
F Massive

D Moderate

C Mild

CXR
CBC, coagulation
studies, UA

CXR

No risk factors*

Risk factors*

Treat underlying
disease (usually
infection)

Bronchoscopy
Treat underlying
disease

Empiric treatment
of infection

Secure airway

Bleeding stops

E Bronchoscopy and
chest CT

G Treat underlying
disease

Bleeding
persists
Embolization
or
Resection
*Risk factors: smoking, age > 40, male

Bleeding continues
Embolization
or
Resection

