HIP PAIN


A. Falls, especially in older persons, raise suspicion for hip
fractures, particularly of the femoral neck and intertrochanteric region, but also of the acetabulum, elsewhere
in the pelvis, or of the tip of the greater trochanter.
Chronic overuse injuries from weightbearing exercise
can produce stress fractures of the pelvis, and atraumatic pelvic “insufficiency” fractures can occur in older
persons, particularly those with osteoporosis. Radiography and often more advanced imaging techniques are
needed to rule out fracture.
B. Pain felt in the groin with examination of the hip is suggestive of hip joint disease. Groin pain with “log-rolling”
the leg is probably the most specific finding because this
maneuver does not stress the knee, back, or hip girdle
musculature. A positive Thomas test to detect hip joint
flexion contracture, in which a patient is unable to keep
the affected leg on the examining table while the other
leg is allowed to dangle off the table with the knee bent,
is suggestive of serious disease. Pain of gradual onset is
most suggestive of osteoarthritis (OA) but can occur
with seronegative inflammatory arthritis (spondyloarthropathies) as well. Pain of rapid onset demands
consideration of infection, avascular necrosis, or a noninfectious inflammatory arthritis. In some conditions,
such as many cases of osteoarthritis and most of polymyalgia rheumatica, pain on motion of the hip joint is felt
in a broader distribution down the thigh as far as the
knee. Indeed sometimes patients complain of knee
pain and the problem is only in the hip..
C. Isolated buttock pain is a less common presentation of
hip arthritis but is a common presentation of degenerative disease in the lumbosacral (LS) spine (with or
without spinal stenosis or nerve root impingement) or
of degenerative or inflammatory disease of the sacroiliac (SI) joint. In the absence of neurologic deficit, the
physical examination is usually nondiagnostic. Exquisite tenderness at the ischial tuberosity is suggestive of
ischial bursitis, although in many cases pelvic fracture
should still be ruled out.
D. An anteroposterior (AP) radiograph of the pelvis is often
sufficient to diagnose osteoarthritis of the hip, degenerative or inflammatory arthritis of the SI joint, or pelvic
fracture. However, depending on the location of symptoms, more detailed evaluation for fracture often includes AP and frog-leg views of the hip, anterior and

526

posterior oblique views of the acetabulum, or Ferguson
views of the SI joints. Excess fluid in the hip joint is
often apparent from changes in soft-tissue planes. Avascular necrosis is generally not apparent on plain radiography until several weeks after onset. Evaluation of the
LS spine by AP and lateral views is usually sufficient to
establish degenerative disease; radiologically diagnosing
nerve root and spinal cord impingement requires more
advanced imaging.
E. Both CT and MRI are much more sensitive than plain
radiographs for diagnosing fractures and should be
considered if clinical suspicion is high despite normal
plain films or if symptoms persist. Bone scans are also
sensitive for fractures starting about 3 days after injury.
MRI is sometimes needed to determine whether excess fluid is present in the hip joint or early in the
course of avascular necrosis. CT and especially MRI
are also more sensitive for detecting inflammatory
disease of the SI joint but are often not clinically necessary. CT is an effective evaluation for lumbar spinal
stenosis, and MRI is useful for both spinal stenosis and
nerve root compression.
F. Aspiration of the hip joint, under imaging guidance, is
needed if there is suspicion of an infected joint. Suspicion for such is increased by the presence of acute
onset; atraumatic, severe pain, particularly with a
positive Thomas test; radiographic evidence of hip
effusion; and/or fever.
G. Lateral hip pain associated with tenderness over the
greater trochanter is a common syndrome caused by
either gluteus medius tendonitis or trochanteric bursitis. Patients with fibromyalgia usually have pain and
tenderness in this region as well but usually bilaterally
and in association with numerous other tender sites.

References
Adkins SB III, Figler RA. Hip pain in athletes. Am Fam Physician
2000;61:2109–2118.
Lane NE. Clinical practice: Osteoarthritis of the hip. N Eng J Med
2007;357:1413–1421.
Scialabba FA, DeLuca SA. Transient osteoporosis of the hip. Am Fam
Physician 1990;41:1759–1760.
Toohey AK, LaSalle TL, Martienz S, Polisson RP. Iliopsoas bursitis:
clinical features, radiographic findings, and disease associations. Semin
Arthritis Rheum 1990;20:41–47.

527
Patient with HIP PAIN
History
Physical examination

No history of trauma

A History of trauma

Consider:
Hip fracture
Pelvic fracture
Trochanteric fracture

Location of pain

B Groin (or thigh)

Consider hip
arthropathy:
Degenerative
Infectious
Inflammatory
Avascular necrosis

C Buttock pain

Consider:
LS spine disease:
OA
Disk disease
with sciatica
SI joint disease:
OA
Inflammatory
Ischial bursitis

D Radiography

Diagnosis
made

Diagnosis
uncertain

E MRI, CT, or
bone scan

F Consider image-guided
hip aspiration

G Lateral pain

Working diagnosis:
Trochanteric syndrome
(bursitis or gluteus
medius tendinitis)

