HIRSUTISM


Hirsutism refers to the appearance of excessive terminal
hair that appears in a male pattern in women. Approximately 5% of women are hirsute. Hirsutism results from
an interaction between the androgen level and the sensitivity of the hair follicle to androgen; as a result, androgen
levels do not correlate well with the degree of hirsutism.
Approximately one half of women with hirsutism have the
idiopathic condition.
A. Clinical features that suggest one of the rare or more
serious causes of hirsutism include abrupt onset, a
presentation later in life, and progressive worsening.
Symptoms and signs of virilization include frontal
balding, acne, clitoromegaly, and deepening of the
voice. Hair growth on the upper lip, chin, chest, abdomen, back, pubis, and legs should be assessed. Hirsutism should be distinguished from hypertrichosis, the
appearance of generalized excessive hair growth that
is genetically determined or follows treatment with
glucocorticoids, phenytoin, or cyclosporine.
B. If hirsutism is moderate or severe, the plasma testosterone and free testosterone should be measured in the
early morning (ideally, on days 4–10 of the menstrual
cycle in cycling women).
C. Hyperandrogenism is most frequently related to the
polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), one of the most
common hormonal disorders affecting women. The syndrome is diagnosed when the patient has at least two
symptoms of chronic hyperandrogenism, oligo-ovulation
or anovulation, and polycystic ovaries. Other diagnoses
must have been excluded also. These patients often have
menstrual irregularity, obesity, and evidence of insulin
resistance (e.g., acanthosis nigricans). A pelvic ultrasound is not required for diagnosis. Additional testing
may include a pregnancy test if the patient has amenorrhea. These patients should be evaluated for glucose intolerance and sleep apnea and often respond well to insulin sensitizers such as metformin or a thiazolidinedione.
Spironolactone and oral contraceptives are often used to
manage hirsutism in these patients.
D. Other causes of hyperandrogenism are unusual. Virilizing congenital adrenal hyperplasia is suggested by
the premature growth of pubic hair and clitoromegaly
and can be excluded by measuring the morning
17-alpha-hydroxyprogesterone level.
E. Cushing’s syndrome is suggested by the development
of truncal obesity, moon face, buffalo hump, purple
striae, or proximal muscle weakness. (See the chapter
on Cushing’s syndrome.) Hyperprolactinemia is suggested by the presence of galactorrhea and an elevated
160

F.

G.

H.

I.

prolactin level. Acromegaly is suggested by the coarsening of facial features or by hand enlargement and is
confirmed by an elevated insulinlike growth factor-1
level.
Androgen-secreting tumors are rare but should be considered among women with an acute presentation or
those who have very high levels of testosterone (!200
ng/dl). Such women should be evaluated with a level of
dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS) and an abdominal and pelvic ultrasound.
Idiopathic hirsutism is the most common diagnosis after these other disorders are excluded by clinical or
laboratory features. The hirsutism can be managed with
cosmetic and hormonal therapy. It is useful to complete
an objective assessment of the degree of hirsutism in
advance of initiating treatment. The Ferriman-Gallwey
score is one such scoring system.
Cosmetic approaches include bleaching, shaving,
waxing, electrolysis, laser treatment, and the use of
depilatory agents. Eflornithine hydrochloride cream
can be used for facial hirsutism but must be used for
approximately 8 weeks before its efficacy can be
determined.
Estrogen-progestin contraceptives suppress plasma testosterone levels, can reduce the need for shaving, and
slow the progression of hirsutism. Contraceptives with
nonandrogenic progestins (e.g., Yasmin, Ortho-Cyclen,
or Demulen 1-50) are preferred. Antiandrogens can be
offered when hirsutism is moderate to severe. Spironolactone at high dosages (50–100 mg twice a day) is effective in reducing hirsutism. Patients must be informed
that spironolactone may be teratogenic and is generally
not prescribed to women who are sexually active and not
using an oral contraceptive. Hyperkalemia is rarely
associated with spironolactone among women with normal renal function. Flutamide is an antiandrogen that
is associated with hepatotoxicity and is not generally
recommended for managing hirsutism. Cyproterone
acetate is an antiandrogen that is available in Canada,
Mexico, and Europe but not in the United States.

References
Azziz R. The evaluation and management of hirsutism. Obstet Gynecol
2003;101(5 Pt 1):995–1007.
Ehrmann DA. Polycystic ovary syndrome. N Engl J Med 2005;352(12):
1223–1236.
Ferriman D, Gallwey J. Clinical assessment of body hair growth in women.
J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1961;21:1440.
McKenna, TJ. Screening for sinister causes of hirsutism. N Engl J Med
1994;331:1015.
Rosenfield RL. Hirsutism. N Engl J Med 2005;353(24):2578–2588.

161
Patient with HIRSUTISM

A History

Physical examination

Mild

Moderate to severe

B Measure testosterone level
Normal
or low

High

H Cosmetic
therapy

C PCOS

Metformin
Thiazolidinedione
Oral contraceptive pill
Spironolactone

D Congenital

adrenal
hyperplasia

17-hydroxyprogesterone
elevated
Treat with
glucocorticoids

E Acromegaly

Prolactinoma
Cushing’s
syndrome
See text

F Adrenal or
ovarian
tumor

DHEAS
and pelvic
ultrasound
Resection

G Idiopathic

I Spironolactone

Oral contraceptive

