Hypomagnesemia is defined as a serum magnesium (Mg+2) level <18 mEq/L (the reference range for serum magnesium level is 1.8–3.0 mEq/L). The prevalence of hypomagnesemia is likely underestimated because of the lack of a good test to predict total body Mg+2 status. Approximately 10% of patients in the hospital and up to 60% of the patients in intensive care units are estimated to have hypomagnesemia. Hypomagnesemia is often the result of renal or GI losses and may be related to loop diuretic use, other drug use, alcohol use, and chronic diarrhea. Cutaneous losses are thought to result from excessive sweating on exercise excretion and also may occur in patients with severe burn injury. IV fluid therapy and volume-expanded states may also cause hypomagnesemia resulting from a dilutional effect. Rarely, familial incidence has been reported, primarily in isolated familial hypomagnesemia, familial hypokalemia, and familial hypomagnesemia-hypercalciuria.
A. Patients with hypomagnesemia may be asymptomatic or have a number of clinical manifestations that could reflect other electrolyte abnormalities. Multiple body systems can be involved, including the heart, neuromuscular system, or CNS. Cardiac symptoms include tachyarrhythmias, torsades de pointes, tachycardia, and fibrillation resistant to standard treatment but responsive to Mg+2 repletion. ECG changes reflect abnormal cardiac repolarization with bifid T waves, U waves, and prolongation of QT or QU interval. Neuromuscular symptoms are similar to those of hypocalcemia and include tremor, twitching, frank tetany, and positive Trousseau's and Chvostek's signs. CNS symptoms may include generalized, tonic-clonic, or multifocal motor seizures triggered by loud noises and can lead to sudden death. Nystagmus and Wernicke's encephalopathy may also be present. The key element in the diagnosis is to determine whether the hypomagnesemia results from a decreased intake/absorption or increased losses. The workup should be composed of a 24-hour quantitative urinary Mg+2 excretion to distinguish increased versus decreased urinary excretion of Mg+2. Increased urinary excretion of magnesium in a patient with hypomagnesemia is invariably a result of renal wasting. However, decreased urinary excretion is usually from renal conservation of magnesium in an attempt to restore Mg+2 equilibrium in the face of inadequate Mg+2 intake. Renal Mg+2 wasting can be seen in patients with defective sodium resorption (diuretic use), use of renal toxins (amphotericin B, cisplatin, aminoglycosides, pentamidine, cyclosporine A), and osmotic diuresis (DM). Extrarenal losses may result from nutrition deficiency (e.g., alcoholism, protein-calorie malnutrition, parenteral nutrition), decreased absorption (e.g., chronic diarrhea, intestinal malabsorption syndromes), and cutaneous losses (e.g., burn patients, marathon runners). Rarely, bone redistribution may occur in patients who have "hungry bone syndrome," in which chronically elevated parathyroid hormone (PTH) is corrected with parathyroidectomy.
B. The treatment of asymptomatic magnesium deficiency is controversial. Patients with hypomagnesemia and associated cardiac disease should receive magnesium supplementation to avoid the risk of developing digoxin cardiotoxicity. The underlying etiology of magnesium losses should be evaluated and treated appropriately. For unknown reasons, patients receiving parenteral nutrition have an increased demand for magnesium. Therefore, magnesium supplementation should be increased to prevent further deficiencies. Symptomatic magnesium deficiency requires repletion to prevent complications such as seizure disorder and ongoing electrolyte imbalance. IV replacement is the route of choice for patients with IV access.

