Hypermagnesemia is defined as an increase of serum magnesium (Mg+2) to >1.1 mmol/L (2.2 mEq/L; 2.6 mg/dl). Hypermagnesemia is relatively uncommon but can be seen in patients with acute renal failure (ARF) who are taking magnesium-containing antacids, laxatives, enemas, or infusions. Acute rhabdomyolysis also is associated with hypermagnesemia. Increasing age is an important risk factor for hypermagnesemia in individuals with apparently normal renal function and presumably reflects the decline in glomerular filtration rate that normally accompanies old age. Mg+2 is efficiently excreted through the kidneys. Even patients with chronic renal failure can develop an increased fractional excretion of magnesium in the remaining functional nephrons. Generally, the kidneys can maintain Mg+2 equilibrium until the creatinine clearance falls below 20 ml/min. Despite declining renal function, patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) and ARF rarely develop hypermagnesemia. Exogenous administration is usually necessary to cause significant hypermagnesemia. Even in a patient with normal renal function, exogenous administration may cause toxicity. It is common for patients to have an enhanced absorption of Mg+2 as a result of inflammatory disease, obstruction, or perforation of the GI tract. Other causes of hypermagnesemia include lithium therapy, metastatic disease to the bone, milk-alkali syndrome, familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia, hypothyroidism, pituitary dwarfism, and Addison's disease. The neurologic symptoms often result from the inhibition of acetylcholine release from the neuromuscular end plate by increased extracellular Mg+2 levels.
A. Hypermagnesemia can be serious and potentially fatal. Lethargy, drowsiness, hypotension, nausea, vomiting, facial flushing, urinary retention, and ileus may be the initial symptoms observed when the serum Mg+2 level exceeds 4-6 mg/dl. If untreated, this condition may progress to flaccid skeletal muscular paralysis and hyporeflexia, bradycardia and bradyarrhythmias, complete heart block, and respiratory depression. Nonspecific ECG changes are often seen and may include prolonged PR intervals and increased QRS duration. Hypotension and cutaneous flushing may be the result of vasodilator effect and inhibition of norepinephrine release from sympathetic postganglionic nerves. Voluntary muscle paralysis and general smooth-muscle paralysis can cause the life-threatening complication of respiratory muscle paralysis and apnea. Coma and cardiac arrest eventually may ensue in patients with severe Mg+2 toxicity.
B. The withdrawal of the magnesium infusion is usually sufficient to treat most cases of hypermagnesemia when the patient has normal renal function. Hydration should be initiated with saline diuresis and furosemide. Mg+2 can be efficiently cleared through the kidneys in a short amount of time. In patients who have severe complications that may require emergent treatment, administration of Ca+2 (1 g for 2–5 minutes of IV calcium chloride or calcium gluconate) may be useful. Patients who have ARF or ESRD may require dialysis against a low magnesium bath. Generally, the expected change in serum Mg+2 after 3-4 hours of dialysis with a high-efficiency membrane is approximately one third to one half the difference between the dialysate Mg+2 concentration and the predialysis serum ultrafilterable Mg+2 level (estimated at 80% of total serum Mg+2). Peritoneal dialysis can also be used to effectively remove Mg+2 in patients who cannot tolerate hemodialysis.

