HYPERCALCEMIA

A. Hypercalcemia is frequently encountered by primary
care physicians. Hypercalcemia is considered mild when
the total serum calcium level is between 10.5 and 12 mg/
dl. Levels >14 mg/dl are considered to be a hypercalcemic crisis and can be lethal. Patients with mild hypercalcemia are often asymptomatic. Patients with more severe
hypercalcemia can present with nonspecific symptoms
that include nausea, anorexia, constipation, abdominal
pain, bone pain, fatigue, polydipsia, and confusion. Signs
of hypercalcemia include dysrhythmias, hypertension,
and short QT on an ECG. The two most common causes
of hypercalcemia are primary hyperparathyroidism and
neoplastic disease, accounting for !90% of cases, and
these can be discriminated on the basis of the serum
parathyroid hormone (PTH) level.
B. Primary hyperparathyroidism has a relatively benign
course. Osteoporosis and renal impairment are two
important long-term consequences that drive early intervention. Parathyroidectomy is recommended for
patients with an elevated PTH level and hypercalcemia
who are "50 years or if the calcium is !12.5 mg/dl,
there are renal stones, there is evidence of renal insufficiency, the Z-score on bone densitometry is "2, or
urinary calcium excretion is particularly high. A preoperative parathyroid sestamibi scan can assist the endocrine surgeon and limit the extent of surgery. Determining intraoperative PTH levels allows the surgeon to
be confident of the procedure’s success before surgical
closure. Medical management of primary hyperparathyroidism with calcimimetics is currently limited to
clinical trials.
Chronic renal failure generally causes hypocalcemia.
If untreated, prolonged high phosphate and low vitamin D levels can lead to increased PTH secretion and
subsequent hypercalcemia. This is termed tertiary
hyperparathyroidism and can be managed surgically
or medically.
C. Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia (FHH) is an autosomal-dominant condition caused by a mutation in
the gene for the calcium receptor. Patients have an innocuous course characterized by mild to moderate
hypercalcemia, normal or slightly elevated PTH levels,
and low urinary calcium excretion. These patients do
not benefit from parathyroidectomy.
D. Hypercalcemia of malignancy is usually symptomatic
and can be severe. Solid tumors induce hypercalcemia
by releasing parathyroid hormone–related protein
(PTHrp), which mimics the action of endogenous PTH.
Bone destruction by metastatic disease or myeloma can
134

also induce hypercalcemia, often in association with an
elevated alkaline phosphatase level.
E. Vitamin D can induce hypercalcemia if taken in overdose,
or if there is excessive action of the 1-alpha-hydroxylase
that creates the active form of vitamin D. This enzyme is
hyperactive in patients with granulomatous disease such
as sarcoidosis and responds well to treatment with glucocorticoids while the underlying disease is being treated.
Consumption of large amounts of calcium or vitamin A
can lead to hypercalcemia, but it is rare.
Treatment of severe hypercalcemia includes emergent fluid repletion with saline and IV administration
of bisphosphonates. Initially saline is given at 200–300
ml/hr and is adjusted to maintain the urine output to
100–150 ml/hr. A loop diuretic can be added but is
not always necessary and can lead to hypokalemia and
hypomagnesemia. In the United States, pamidronate
and zoledronate are bisphosphonates licensed for use
in this indication. Zoledronate is preferred because it
can be given over a shorter time (15 minutes as compared with 2 hours for pamidronate) and is more potent. Hypocalcemia occurs in up to 50% of patients
treated with bisphosphonates for hypercalcemia of
malignancy, although symptomatic hypocalcemia is
rare. Calcitonin is characterized by good tolerability
but poor efficacy in normalizing the serum calcium
level. However, a major advantage of calcitonin is the
acute onset of the hypocalcemic effect (reduction of
1–2 mg/dl within 6 hours), which contrasts with the
delayed (approximately 2–4 days) but more pronounced effect of bisphosphonates. It is administered
intramuscularly or subcutaneously every 12 hours at a
dose of 4 IU/kg. Gallium nitrate is characterized by
high efficacy and few adverse events apart from renal
toxicity (10% of cases). However, data are limited, and
further trials are necessary.

References
Jacobs TP, Bilezikian JP. Clinical review: rare causes of hypercalcemia.
J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2005;90(11):6316–6322.
Mikhail N, Cope D. Evaluation and treatment of primary hyperparathyroidism. JAMA 2005;294(21):2700.
NIH conference. Diagnosis and management of asymptomatic primary
hyperparathyroidism: consensus development conference statement.
Ann Intern Med 1991;114:593–597.
Pecherstorfer M, Brenner K, Zojer N. Current management strategies
for hypercalcemia. Treat Endocrinol 2003;2(4):273–292.
Saunders Y, Ross JR, Broadley KE, et al. Systematic review of bisphosphonates for hypercalcaemia of malignancy. Palliat Med
2004;18(5):418–431.

135
Patient with HYPERCALCEMIA

A Total calcium
!10.5 mg/dl

Exclude contributing
medications

B Measure PTH

Low

Normal or
high
Check 24-hour
urinary calcium excretion

Low

D PTHrp elevated

Normal or
high

C FHH

Malignancy

Primary or
tertiary
hypercalcemia

Evaluate for:
Calcium !12 mg/dl
Marked hypercalciuria
Nephrolithiasis or
impaired renal function
Z-score "2 on bone
mineral density
Age "50 yr

Any of the above
are present

None of the above
are present

Parathyroid Sestamibi Scan
and Parathyroidectomy

Maintain hydration
and monitor

E 1,25 Vitamin D

Granulomatous
disease
(tuberculosis,
sarcoidosis)

↑Alkaline
phosphatase

Bone lysis
(e.g., metastatic
tumor)

