HYPERTHYROIDISM

Hyperthyroidism can be caused by an increased production of thyroid hormone (as in Graves’ disease or an autonomous nodule) or increased release of preformed thyroid
hormone (as in thyroiditis). Hyperthyroidism can also be
caused by overreplacement with exogenous thyroid hormone, ectopic hyperthyroidism, or unregulated stimulation of the thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) receptor
(as in trophoblastic disease or a TSH-secreting pituitary
adenoma).
A. The presentation of hyperthyroidism can range from
asymptomatic to thyroid storm. In particular, the
presentation in older patients can be highly variable.
Characteristic symptoms include anxiety, tremor, palpitations, heat intolerance, insomnia, oligoamenorrhea,
and weight loss despite an increased appetite. Typical
signs include tachycardia, systolic hypertension, tremor,
lid retraction, lid lag, warm skin, and hyperreflexia. The
presence of a goiter will depend on the cause of the
hyperthyroidism. A single palpable nodule or multiple
nodules suggest an autonomous thyroid adenoma or a
multinodular goiter as the source, respectively; a painful,
tender thyroid gland suggests granulomatous thyroiditis.
Signs that are suggestive of Graves’ disease include goiter, thyroid bruit, exophthalmos, periorbital edema, and
pretibial myxedema.
B. The diagnosis of hyperthyroidism is confirmed using
biochemical testing of the thyroxine and TSH levels. An
increased thyroxine level with a suppressed TSH level
characterizes overt hyperthyroidism. Patients with subclinical hyperthyroidism may have a normal thyroxine
level and a suppressed TSH level. Some patients demonstrate T3 toxicosis with a normal thyroxine level and
an elevated level of triiodothyronine. TSH-induced
hyperthyroidism and thyroid hormone resistance, each
characterized by an increased level of TSH, are very
rare. An elevated thyroxine with a normal TSH level is
usually attributed to abnormalities in thyroid-binding
proteins in patients who are clinically euthyroid.
C. When the etiology of the hyperthyroidism is unclear, a
thyroid radioiodine uptake study can be performed.
Graves’ disease is characterized by a high uptake; thyroiditis is characterized by a low uptake.
D. Propylthiouracil and methimazole are the antithyroid
medications used in the United States. These agents
are actively concentrated by the thyroid gland and their
primary effect is to inhibit thyroid hormone synthesis
by interfering with thyroid peroxidase–mediated iodination of tyrosine residues in thyroglobulin, a critical
140

step in the synthesis of thyroxine and triiodothyronine.
Propylthiouracil also blocks the conversion of thyroxine
to triiodothyronine within the thyroid and peripheral
tissues, although the clinical importance of this function is uncertain. No dosage adjustment is needed in
patients with renal or liver failure or among children or
the elderly.
The usual starting dosage of methimazole is 20 mg
per day as a single daily dose, and the usual starting
dosage of propylthiouracil is 100 mg given three times
a day. Following initial dosing, follow-up testing of
thyroid function is suggested for approximately every 6
weeks until the thyroid function tests normalize. Many
patients can ultimately be controlled at a low dosage.
Testing frequency can be reduced to every 6 months
over time. Following a discussion about the risk of relapse, antithyroid drugs can be withdrawn after 12–18
months to determine whether ongoing treatment is
required.
E. Cutaneous reactions to antithyroid drugs are not uncommon and are usually mild. The drug should be
stopped in patients with arthralgias because this may
be a presentation of a severe transient migratory polyarthritis associated with antithyroid drug use. Agranulocytosis, the most feared side effect, occurs in approximately 1 in 270 patients prescribed antithyroid
medications. A baseline differential white cell count
should be obtained before treatment is restarted, and
retesting should be done if fever or sore throat develops. The medication should be discontinued if the
granulocyte count is <1000 per cubic millimeter. Hepatotoxicity and vasculitis (drug-induced lupus) are rare
but well described.
F. Current treatments for Graves’ disease include antithyroid medications, radioiodine, and surgery. Initial treatment usually includes an antithyroid medication and a
beta blocker for symptomatic relief. A typical starting
combination would include methimazole 20 mg with
atenolol 25 mg, both given once daily. For patients with
more severe hyperthyroidism, iodine treatment can
provide rapid relief of symptoms. A typical approach
would be to prescribe 3 drops of saturated solution of
potassium iodide 3 times daily for up to 10 days. Radioiodine can be given as primary treatment for patients
with Graves’ hyperthyroidism, although many clinicians
will wait until the first relapse before offering this approach. Hyperthyroidism can be exacerbated for a short
time by radioiodine treatment. In patients with cardiac
disease or in the elderly, in whom such an exacerbation

141
Patient with HYPERTHYROIDISM

A Signs and symptoms

uptake study

Methimazole 5– 30 mg/day
Propylthiouracil 100 mg tid

Elevated

Depressed

Graves’
disease

Thyroiditis

Treatment:
Antithyroid Medications
Radioiodine
SURGERY

TSH levels
Thyroxine levels

D Antithyroid drug therapy

C Thyroid radioiodine

F

B Laboratory tests

E Reactions to

antithyroid drugs

G Preferred in

pregnant women

Monitor thyroid function
every 4 –6 wk until
euthyroid state achieved
Discontinue drug therapy
after 12 –18 mo

would be risky, pretreatment with antithyroid medications can be useful. Surgery is usually reserved for patients with an obstructing goiter.
Hyperthyroidism associated with a toxic thyroid
adenoma can be treated with antithyroid medications
and a beta blocker. Because these autonomous nodules
do not resolve spontaneously, more definitive treatment is usually indicated after the initial symptoms
have been controlled. Radioiodine is a preferred over
surgery for most patients but is less likely to be effective in patients with large or multiple nodules.
G. Women who develop hyperthyroidism while pregnant
are at increased risk of spontaneous abortion, premature labor, stillbirth, and preeclampsia. Changes in
thyroid hormone–binding globulin (usually doubles),
levels of human chorionic gonadotropin (that can
mimic the actions of TSH), and endogenous physiology (altered TSH responsiveness) can complicate the
biochemical assessment of thyroid function in pregnancy. Because radioiodine is absolutely contraindicated during pregnancy, antithyroid medications are

the preferred treatment for pregnant women with
hyperthyroidism. Propylthiouracil remains the preferred treatment for hyperthyroidism occurring during
pregnancy. The dose should be minimized to prevent
fetal hypothyroidism because the drug does cross the
placenta. Methimazole may be associated with congenital anomalies, including aplasia cutis and choanal
or esophageal atresia. Generally treatment is given to a
point where mild hyperthyroidism is allowed to persist.
Low thyroid function at birth is found in approximately
half of neonates whose mothers received an antithyroid medication; ultimate intelligence has been demonstrated to be normal. Both methimazole and propylthiouracil are approved for nursing mothers by
the American Academy of Pediatrics, although they do
appear in breast milk in minute quantities.
References
Cooper DS. Drug therapy: antithyroid drugs. N Engl J Med 2005;352:
905–917.
Weetman AP. Graves’ disease. N Engl J Med 2000;343:1236–1248.

