HYPERTENSION


A. Appropriate and standard measurement of blood pressure
(BP) is imperative to accurately diagnose, manage, and
treat hypertension. Caffeine, exercise, and smoking should
be avoided for at least 30 minutes prior to measurement
and patients should be seated with the arm being
measured at heart level. Indications for ambulatory BP
monitoring include suspected “white coat” hypertension,
hypotensive symptoms on therapy, episodic hypertension,
and autonomic dysfunction.
B. Newer clinical guidelines for the management of hypertension stress the importance of treating all patients
with hypertension (systolic BP [SBP] !140 mm Hg or
diastolic BP [DBP] !90 mm Hg), rather than risk
stratifying based on cardiovascular risk factors to determine who to treat. This is seen by the new designation
of “prehypertension,” which comprises those patients at
high risk for the development of hypertension. In addition, those who present with markedly elevated BP
(!180/120 mm Hg) must be assessed for end-organ
damage to rule out hypertensive crisis (urgency or
emergency) (see Table 2).
C. The initial evaluation of a patient with hypertension
includes history, physical examination, laboratory tests
(urinalysis [UA], glucose, chemistry, fasting lipids),
and ECG. This allows for screening of identifiable
causes of hypertension (e.g., hypokalemia → mineralocorticoid excess; elevated creatinine → kidney disease; striae → cushingoid state; age "30 and/or femoral bruit → renovascular disease; etc.).
D. The use of lifestyle modifications is a requisite component of hypertension management. Weight loss, physical activity, moderation of alcohol consumption, and
the adoption of a low-salt diet can lower BP up to
20 mm Hg.
E. A large body of evidence from randomized controlled
trials now supports the use of specific classes of antihypertensive medications based on underlying comorbid
states (or compelling indications). Initial pharmacologic
therapy should be guided based on such an indication
(Table 1). When one is not present, a thiazide diuretic
or angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor (if
risk for coronary artery disease is high) should be firstline therapy. If the target BP is not achieved, a different
class of antihypertensive medication should be added
rather than substituted because recent data indicate
that most people will require multiple agents to achieve
their target BP. As a result, two-drug combinations are
reasonable first choices in those with stage 2 hypertension. In the event of a hypertensive crisis, the medications in Table 2 are indicated.
74

Table 1 Classes of Antihypertensive Medications
Based on Compelling Indications
Drug Class
ACE inhibitor
ARB
Beta blocker

Diuretic
Calcium channel
blocker

Compelling
Indications
Heart failure, post-MI,
CKD, DM, high
CAD risk
Heart failure, DM,
CKD, LVH
Heart failure, post-MI,
angina
Heart failure, elderly,
African American
Angina, PSVT,
Raynaud’s disease

Adverse Effects
Cough, renal failure,
hyperkalemia
Hyperkalemia, renal failure
Bronchospasm, heart block
(2nd or 3rd), worsening
peripheral vascular disease
Gout, dyslipidemia
Heart block (2nd or 3rd
degree), heart failure
(systolic)

ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; ARB, adrenergic receptor binder;
CAD, coronary artery disease; CKD, chronic kidney disease; DM, diabetes mellitus; LVH, left ventricular hypertrophy; MI, myocardial infarction;
PSVT, paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia.

Table 2 Hypertensive Crises
Drug
Nitroglycerin
Nitroprusside

Mechanism
Venodilator
Arteriolar/venous dilator

Nicardipine

Calcium channel blocker
(dihydropyridine)
Alpha/beta blocker
Direct vasodilator

Labetalol
Hydralazine

Indication
Myocardial ischemia
Aortic dissection (with
concomitant beta
blocker)
Most situations (caution
in heart failure)
Most situations
Pregnancy (preeclampsia)

If evidence of end-organ damage (Myocardial infarction, cerebrovascular
accident, congestive heart failure, glomerulonephritis), must use parenteral agent to urgently lower BP. If asymptomatic, can use oral agents
and follow up closely.

References
The ALLHAT Officers and Coordinators for the ALLHAT Collaborative
Research Group. Major outcomes in high-risk hypertensive patients
randomized to angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or calcium
channel blocker vs. diuretic: the Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering
Treatment to Prevent Heart Attack Trial (ALLHAT). JAMA
2002;288:2981–2997.
August P. Initial treatment of hypertension. N Engl J Med 2003;348: 610617.
Chobanian AV, Bakris GL, Black HR, et al. The seventh report of the
Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and
Treatment of High Blood Pressure: the JNC 7 Report. JAMA
2003;289:2560–2572.
The Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation Study Investigators. Effects
of an angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitor, ramipril, on cardiovascular events in high-risk patients. N Engl J Med 2000;342:145–153.
Kaplan N. Kaplan’s Clinical Hypertension, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins, 2002.

75
Patient with HYPERTENSION

A Blood pressure

(average of two readings
at two separate times)

B SBP 120 –139 mm Hg or

B SBP !140 mm Hg or

B SBP !180 mm Hg or

DBP !90 mm Hg

DBP 80 – 89 mm Hg

DBP !120 mm Hg

C History, physical

Prehypertension

New onset or endorgan damage?

examination,
laboratory tests,
ECG

Encourage lifestyle
modifications, monitor
closely

D Lifestyle modifications:

No

Yes

Treat with oral
agents
Follow closely

Hypertensive crisis
(see Table 2)

low-salt diet, weight
loss, exercise

At target BP?
"140/90 mm Hg
or
"130/80 mm Hg for
diabetes mellitus,
chronic kidney disease

No

E Compelling
indication

Treatment based
on indication
(see Table 1)

Yes

No compelling
indication

Stage 1:
140 –159/80 – 89 mm Hg
Single-drug therapy
with thiazide diuretic
or ACE inhibitor

Continue lifestyle
modifications

Stage 2:
SBP !160 mm Hg
or DBP !90 mm Hg
Consider two-drug
combination

If not at target BP,
add different class of
drug based on side effect
profile and/or indication

