HYPERGLYCEMIA

The prevalence of diabetes mellitus is increasing exponentially in the United States and around the globe. The disease currently affects approximately 18 million Americans.
Type 2 diabetes accounts for approximately 95% of all cases
and is characterized by insulin resistance and hyperglycemia. Hyperinsulinemia occurs early in the disease but is not
maintained indefinitely. Many patients ultimately require
insulin to maintain glucose levels in the normal range. Because almost 90% of all patients with diabetes will die from
cardiovascular complications, cardiovascular risk reduction
is the primary target.
A. Diabetes is diagnosed if there are symptoms of diabetes
(polyuria, polydipsia, unexplained weight loss) and a
random glucose level of !200 mg/dl. A fasting glucose
of !126 mg/dl or a glucose of !200 mg/dl 2 hours after
a 75-g glucose load are also diagnostic. Diagnostic use of
the hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) is not recommended.
B. Hyperglycemia not sufficient to meet the diagnostic
criteria for diabetes (prediabetes) is categorized as either impaired fasting glucose or impaired glucose tolerance. Diabetes can be prevented in patients with
either of these conditions if patients lose weight and
embark on an exercise program. Metformin can also
be used to prevent the onset of diabetes in these patients at high risk.
C. Secondary causes of diabetes should be considered
when evaluating any patient with diabetes. Drugs
that cause diabetes such as glucocorticoids, thiazides,

128

Dlantin, and protease inhibitors should have their
doses reduced or replaced with alternative agents if
possible. Genetic causes of diabetes should be excluded if a strong family history of diabetes or a phenotype (e.g., Down, Turner’s, Klinefelter’s syndromes) is
noted. Endocrinopathies such as Cushing’s syndrome,
acromegaly, pheochromocytoma, hyperthyroidism, and
others should be sought from the history and examination. Patients with diseases that affect the exocrine
pancreas, such as hemochromatosis, chronic pancreatitis, pancreatic, malignancy, or cystic fibrosis, are at
high risk for diabetes; treatment of the underlying disease is often critical to reduce the rate of progression
to insulin deficiency and to managing the diabetes.
D. Patients with type 1 diabetes require lifelong insulin
treatment. Typically basal insulin is used with ultra–
short-acting insulins given before each meal or snack.
Patients with type 1 diabetes should be taught to count
carbohydrates and to calculate both correction and
prandial insulin dosing. These patients should work
with a diabetes team and be offered insulin-pump
therapy. Blood pressure; lipid; and renal, eye, and foot
care guidelines are similar to those for patients with
type 2 diabetes.
E. Patients who are newly diagnosed with type 2 diabetes
should be provided with a glucometer and testing instructions and referred for diabetes education and medical nutrition therapy. Smoking cessation and the benefits
of exercise and weight loss should be emphasized.
(Continued on page 130)

129
Patient with HYPERGLYCEMIA

A Glucose

Pregnant

level

Cont’d on p 131

Fasting

Postprandial

!200 mg/dl !126 mg/dl

140–200 mg/dl

B Impaired glucose
tolerance

C Secondary
diabetes

Investigate
and treat
accordingly

A Diabetes

confirmed

D Type 1 diabetes

(especially if younger
age or ketoacidosis)

Multiple daily insulin
injections or
pump therapy

!100 mg/dl

B Impaired

fasting glucose

E Type 2 diabetes

Cont’d on p 131

130
F. For patients requiring treatment, metformin remains
the first-line agent of choice. Patients should be warned
that early GI side effects are not uncommon and should
be tolerated if possible; they usually abate within 2
weeks. Metformin use is associated with cardiovascular
risk reduction but cannot be used in patients with creatinine levels !1.5 mg or in those who have severe
chronic illnesses. Sulfonylureas are added as secondline agents because they are cost-effective. Short-acting
sulfonylureas such as glipizide are preferred for their
shorter half-life, especially among older patients. Thiazolidinediones such as pioglitazone are used as thirdline therapy or among patients with contraindications
to first- and second-line drugs; however, they have
more limited efficacy and have been associated with
cardiovascular risk and bone loss.
Gliptins have limited efficacy but are weight neutral
and well tolerated. Exenatide has a high incidence of
GI side effects and limited efficacy but can result in
weight loss.
G. A typical starting dose of insulin is 0.3 U/kg. Insulin
management should include a basal insulin (insulin
glargine or neutral protamine Hagedorn [NPH]) with
shorter-acting insulins added before meals in an incremental fashion. Doses are titrated to premeal and
postprandial glucoses. Patients in need of insulin treatment should be warned to check their glucose before
driving. Current approaches to glycemic management
include the use of glucagon-like-peptide (GLP)-1 analogs, inhibitors of dipeptidyl-peptidase-4, and amylin
analogs.
H. Blood pressure control is just as important as glycemic
control. Treatment with an angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor is typically used as a first line,
with calcium channel blockers and thiazide diuretics
added as necessary. Most patients require two to four
antihypertensive agents to achieve a recommended
blood pressure of "130/80 mm Hg.
I. Urinary microalbumin levels should be assessed yearly.
The presence of !30 mg of microalbumin per gram of
creatinine is a risk factor for nephropathy and cardiovascular disease. ACE inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) should be titrated until the
microalbumin level is suppressed below 30 mg/g creatinine.
J. Hyperlipidemia in diabetes typically features hypertriglyceridemia and low levels of high-density lipoprotein (HDL). The latter can be treated with fibrates or
niacin. Levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) !100
mg/dl are associated with increased cardiovascular
risk. Statins should be offered to such patients.
K. Gestational diabetes refers to any diabetes that is diagnosed during pregnancy. Screening is optimally performed at 24–28 weeks of gestation or earlier in
women at high risk (positive family history, obesity,
prior macrosomia). Diagnosis is suggested by a fasting
glucose !126 mg/dl, a random glucose !200 mg/dl,

or a glucose !140 mg/dl 1 hour after a 50-g glucose
load. Diagnosis during pregnancy is confirmed using a
3-hour oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) using a
100-g glucose load. Criteria for a positive 3-hour glucose tolerance test include a fasting glucose !95 mg/
dl, a 1-hour sample !180 mg/dl, a 2-hour sample
!155 mg/dl, or a 3-hour sample !140 mg/dl. Patients with gestational diabetes should be provided
with nutritional counseling and a glucometer. Fasting
glucose readings should be kept at "90 mg/dl, and
1-hour postprandial levels should be "120 mg/dl. A
minority of women with gestational diabetes will require insulin therapy; usually insulin NPH and ultra–
short-acting insulins (lispro or aspart) are used. Oral
agents are not routinely used to manage gestational
diabetes. Sulfonylureas are contraindicated in pregnancy, and safety data for metformin use are very
limited.
L. Hyperglycemia during hospitalization is associated with
significant increases in morbidity and mortality. Normalization of glucose has been shown to be beneficial among
patients in medical and surgical intensive care units. In
intensive care unit settings, insulin should be infused
intravenously if glucose is !120 mg/dl and titrated thereafter to a glucose level of "140 mg/dl. The patient can
be transitioned to SC insulin when stable (e.g., extubated, off pressors) whether or not the patient is eating.
If glucose control has been on target, many clinicians
start with an insulin dose that is 80% of the previous day’s
total daily insulin use. Prescriptions should be written for
basal, prandial, and correction doses.

Table 1 Targets for Patients with Diabetes
HbA1c
Fasting glucose
Peak postprandial glucose
Blood pressure
Urine microalbumin
Lipids
LDL
HDL

"7%
90–130 mg/dl
"180 mg/dl
"130/80 mm Hg
"30 mg/day creatinine
"100 mg/dl ("70 mg/dl if additional risk factors are present)
!40 mg/dl

Daily low-dose aspirin therapy (age !40 or additional risk factors)
Annual foot examination
Yearly dilated eye examination by an ophthalmologist

References
American Diabetes Association. Clinical practice recommendations 2009.
Diabetes Care 2009;28(Suppl 1):S1–79.
DeWitt DE, Hirsch IB. Outpatient insulin therapy in type 1 and type 2
diabetes mellitus: scientific review. JAMA 2003;289(17):2254–2264.
Galerneau F, Inzucchi SE. Diabetes mellitus in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 2004;31(4):907–933, xi–xii.
Moghissi ES, Hirsch IB. Hospital management of diabetes. Endocrinol
Metab Clin North Am 2005;34(1):99–116.
Van den Berghe G, Wouters P, Weekers F, et al. Intensive insulin therapy
in the critically ill patients. N Engl J Med 2001;345(19):1359–1367.

131
Patient with HYPERGLYCEMIA
(Cont’d from p 129)

K Pregnant

L Hospitalized

Use 3-hr OGTT
or 1-hr OGTT

E Type 2

diabetes

F Manage
glucose
Target
A1c
"7%

H Blood

pressure

I Urinary

Target
"130/80 mm Hg

microalbumin

J Lipids

Target
!30 mg/g
creatinine
ACE inhibitor
or ARB

Aspirin
Smoking
cessation
Diet (lose 10%)
Exercise
(30 min/day) If age !40 yr
Vaccinations

LDL

HDL

Target
"100 mg/dl

Target
!40 mg/dl

Yearly dilated
eye examination

Statin
Fibrate or
nicotinic acid

Exercise

Noninsulin hypoglycemics
(add basal insulin if A1c !7%
on two agents)

Metformin

Sulfonylureas Others (TZDs,
gliptins,exenatide)

Insulin

Basal

Bolus

NPH/glargine

Aspart/lispro/
regular

