HYPERURICEMIA AND GOUT


A. Volume depletion, obesity, high metabolic turnover
states (tumor lysis, myeloproliferative disorders, hemolysis), certain medications (ethanol, diuretics, salicylates, calcineurin inhibitors), and diets high in meat or
seafood can cause an elevation of the serum uric acid
level. Rare genetic disorders can also cause hyperuricemia. History should include a dietary history, drinking history, and lead exposure at work and home. Examination should search for evidence of arthritis in all
joints, including asymptomatic ones, and for the presence of tophi on hands, feet, Achilles tendons, areas of
minor trauma (olecranon bursa), and the ears (nodules
on the pinna that do not transilluminate). Consider a
radiograph of affected joint to look for tophi, joint
destruction, and chondrocalcinosis.
B. The management of asymptomatic hyperuricemia is
controversial, and there are insufficient data to guide
management in most cases. The prevention of chronic
urate nephropathy, nephrolithiasis, and gouty arthritis
determines the decision to treat in asymptomatic cases.
Chronic urate nephropathy is rare in the absence of
tophaceous gout. Lead toxicity should be considered
when uric acid levels are very elevated (!12 mg/dl).
High urinary uric acid excretion increases the risk of
urate nephrolithiasis, and allopurinol can be considered in this situation, especially if the patient only has
a single kidney. If the hyperuricemia is iatrogenic, consider changes in therapy (change diuretics to another
class of antihypertensives; losartan causes a modest
reduction in serum uric acid). Many cases of renal insufficiency with hyperuricemia result from lead exposure. Weight reduction and reduction of purine-rich
foods should be considered.
C. Although acute gout classically presents as a monoarthritis of the first toe (podagra) with marked inflammation, polyarticular and/or tophaceous presentations
are not uncommon. They are seen especially in patients
who are older or immunosuppressed (especially those
with organ transplants). Septic arthritis always needs to
be considered when dealing with monoarthritis or
oligoarthritis. Other crystalline arthropathies should also

542

be considered: calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate (calcium pyrophosphate deposition disease [CPPD] causing
pseudogout), apatite, oxalate, and others. Arthrocentesis
should be performed if possible to look for the presence
of crystals and to rule out infection. If a crystal diagnosis
cannot be made, the decision to treat can be made on
the basis of a history and examination consistent with
gout: prior episodes that resolved spontaneously within
several days to a few weeks, development of maximal
pain within 1 day, typical distribution (i.e., podagra), or
evidence of tophi. Serum uric acid levels are lower during acute episodes of gouty arthritis, and the absence or
presence of hyperuricemia should be used with caution
in the diagnosis of arthritis. Atypical presentations include polyarthritis and indolent and chronic arthritis.
Decisions to treat should be tailored to the individual
patient.
D. The patient at low risk without renal, liver, or bone
marrow impairment and no history of peptic ulcer disease can be treated with high-dose NSAIDs. NSAIDs
work best when used at the first sign of symptoms and
may be less effective for fully established arthritis.
E. In patients in whom NSAIDs are contraindicated,
prednisone at doses of 10–60 mg can be used until the
attack has resolved.
F. Alternative therapies include intraarticular steroids
(particularly attractive option for monoarthritis of
knee or ankle), colchicine, and narcotic analgesics.
Oral colchicine (1.2 mg followed by 0.6 mg/hr for
6 doses) has a very narrow therapeutic window between symptom relief and GI upset (abdominal pain,
nausea, vomiting, diarrhea). IV colchicine, although
effective, is not recommended for the treatment of
gout; rarely if ever do the benefits of treating a nonfatal and self-limited disorder outweigh the potential
risks of IV colchicine (cardiovascular collapse, aplastic anemia, tissue necrosis). Narcotic analgesics can
be used for symptomatic relief until the gout flare
spontaneously resolves. In the rare patient in whom
all therapies carry considerable risk, a viable option is
to do nothing.
(Continued on page 544)

543
Patient with HYPERURICEMIA and GOUT

A History

Laboratory tests

Physical examination

B Asymptomatic

C Acute gouty arthritis

hyperuricemia

D Patient at
Normal creatine
Serum uric acid "12 mg/dl
Urinary excretion
!1000 mg/day

Renal insufficiency,
Serum uric acid !12mg/dl
Urinary excretion
!1000 mg/day

Observe

Lead exposure?
Consider allopurinol,
especially if one
kidney

low risk

NSAIDs

E Kidney, liver,

bone marrow
impairment

Steroids

Prophylaxis?
Cont’d on p 545

F Infection or

steroids
contraindicated

Intraarticular
Steroids
Colchicine
Narcotic
Analgesics
No Therapy

544
G. After the acute flare has resolved, prophylaxis can be
considered. For patients with a first attack, especially
with a clear inciting event such as binge drinking, prophylaxis is not indicated. Recurrent attacks or the presence of tophi are indications for uric acid–lowering
therapy. Therapy should not be started for several
weeks after the acute flare has resolved. Treatment
that reduces uric acid can precipitate further flares of
gout, so patients should be treated with colchicine
prophylaxis (0.6 QD or 0.6 QOD if renal impairment)
for the first year of therapy regardless of whether
allopurinol or a uricosuric agent is used.
H. Patients in whom long-term prophylaxis is not indicated
should be encouraged to avoid binge drinking, to
reduce intake of purine-rich foods, and to lose
weight if applicable. If the patient is taking a diuretic for hypertension, consider changing to another antihypertensive.
I. Allopurinol (a xanthine oxidase inhibitor) is the firstline therapy of many physicians in the treatment of
gout regardless of whether the hyperuricemia results
from overproduction or undersecretion; unfortunately,
however, allopurinol does have a relatively high rate of
hypersensitivity reactions. If the patient has a history of
nephrolithiasis, uricosurics are contraindicated and allopurinol is the better choice. If the patient has renal

impairment, uricosurics are usually ineffective and
again allopurinol is a better choice but should be
adjusted for glomerular filtration rate. Allopurinol inhibits the degradation of azathioprine and can cause
toxicity; reduce the dose of azathioprine or switch to
another agent.
J. If hyperuricemia is from underexcretion ("600 mg
uric acid in 24 hours), probenecid can be used at a
starting dose of 500 mg bid. Encourage adequate
hydration to reduce the risk of nephrolithiasis.
K. Allopurinol and probenecid need to be titrated until
the serum uric acid level is "6 mg/dl. Although the
illness can flare while receiving therapy, this is not a
reason to stop these medications; flares should be
treated while continuing the uric acid–lowering medications. Prolonged therapy with colchicine can cause a
myoneuropathy, especially for those taking calcineurin
inhibitors. Follow deep tendon reflexes and motor
strength while the patient is being treated.
References
Eggeneen AT. Gout: an update. Am Fam Physician 2007;76:801–808.
Pittman JR, Bross MH. Diagnosis and management of gout. Am Fam
Physician 1999;59:1799–1806.
Schumacher HR Jr, Chen LX. The practical management of gout. Cleve
Clin J Med 2008;75 (Suppl 5):S22–S25.

545
Patient with HYPERURICEMIA and GOUT
(Cont’d from p 543)

G Prophylaxis?

No

H Avoid precipitants,

EtOH
Purine-rich foods
Consider change if
iatrogenic
Encourage weight loss
Observe

Yes

I Overproduction
or renal
insufficiency

J Underexcretion

Allopurinol
#
Colchicine

Uricosuric
#
Colchicine

K Long-term
follow-up

