HYPERKINESIAS

Disorders of movement are generally classified into two
categories: those with too little movement (hypokinesias)
and those with excess movement (hyperkinesias). Hypokinetic movement disorders include Parkinson’s disease (see
Parkinson’s Disease chapter) and atypical parkinsonian syndromes. The focus of this chapter is hyperkinesias, which
include involuntary movements such as chorea, dystonia,
myoclonus, tics, and tremor (see Tremor chapter). Most
movement disorders result from impairment of the basal
ganglia circuitry. The key to diagnosis of hyperkinesias is
history and neurologic examination.
A. Chorea is defined as brief, irregular, nonsustained movements that flow between muscle groups and can be partially suppressible. Other similar types of irregular, flowing movements include athetosis and ballism. Athetosis is
slower than chorea and more typically affects distal extremities. Ballism describes large-amplitude choreic
movements. The etiologies of chorea encompass primary
causes such as inherited disorders (e.g., Huntington’s
disease, neuroacanthocytosis, Wilson’s disease, and ataxiatelangiectasia), secondary causes (e.g., infections, structural lesions, and metabolic abnormalities), and physiologic chorea (seen in infancy). Treatment of chorea is
challenging, but symptoms may be controlled with amantadine, neuroleptics, and dopamine-depleting agents such
as tetrabenazine and reserpine.
B. Dystonia results from uncontrolled co-contraction
of agonist and antagonist muscles causing abnormal
postures of the affected body part. It can be classified
by location (focal or generalized) or by etiology.
Examples of focal dystonia include cervical dystonia
(torticollis), blepharospasm, task-specific dystonia
(writer’s cramp, embouchure dystonia), and spasmodic
dysphonia. Generalized dystonia can result from
inherited disorders, including DYT-1 dystonia (Oppenheim dystonia) and dopa-responsive dystonia; from
perinatal injury; or from heredodegenerative diseases
(e.g., Wilson’s disease, Huntington’s disease). Dystonia
may be alleviated by anticholinergics, baclofen, or benzodiazepines. Botulinum toxin injections into affected
muscles work well for many types of focal dystonia.
Deep brain stimulation of the globus pallidus internus

446

is used to treat medication-refractory dystonia, particularly DYT-1 dystonia. Dopa-responsive dystonia is
exquisitely sensitive to low doses of levodopa.
C. Myoclonus is a rapid involuntary movement; it can be
positive, as in a muscle contraction, or negative if there
is a lapse of muscle tone. Asterixis is a form of negative
myoclonus and is seen in patients with metabolic or
toxic encephalopathies such as hepatic dysfunction.
Myoclonus can be generalized, focal, or segmental. It
may result from damage to the cortex, brainstem spinal
cord, or peripheral nerves. It is common in some types
of seizure disorders (e.g., juvenile myoclonic epilepsy)
and is frequently seen after global hypoxic injury.
Myoclonus may respond to treatment with benzodiazepines.
D. Tics are also rapid movements of particular body parts
but range in severity from being simple motor tics
involving one muscle group to complex and repetitive
movements of multiple muscle groups. Tics are considered to be involuntary, but they are associated with
a premonitory “urge” and can be suppressed briefly.
Tics may change in severity, location, and frequency
over time. When motor tics appear in combination
with vocal tics, a diagnosis of Tourette’s syndrome
should be considered. Tics are commonly treated with
clonidine, neuroleptics, or dopamine depleters when
necessary.
Tardive dyskinesia is a term describing a potentially
permanent movement disorder that results from the
use of dopamine-blocking agents such as neuroleptics
and antiemetics (metoclopramide). It is characterized
by choreic and/or dystonic movements affecting any
part of the body but particularly affecting the mouth
and tongue (orobuccal lingual dyskinesias).

References
Agarwal P, Frucht SJ. Myoclonus. Curr Opin Neurol 2003;16:515–521.
Bhidayasiri R, Truong DD. Chorea and related disorders. Postgrad Med
J 2004;80:527–534.
Bressman SB. Dystonia genotypes, phenotypes and classification. Adv
Neurol 2004;94:101–107.

447
Patient with HYPERKINESIAS

B Dystonia

A Chorea

Primary
Huntington’s disease
Neuroacanthocytosis
Wilson’s disease
Ataxia-telangiectasia
Dentatorubropallidoluysian atrophy

Generalized
Focal
Torticollis
Blepharospasm
Spasmodic dysphonia
Physiologic
Writer’s cramp
Infancy
Embouchure dystonia

Secondary
Metabolic (hyperparathyroidism,
hyponatremia or hypernatremia,
hypocalcemia, hypoglycemia or
hyperglycemia)
Autoimmune (lupus, chorea
gravidarum)
Toxic (carbon monoxide, mercury)
Infectious (Sydenham’s chorea)
Infarcts
Drugs (neuroleptics, oral
contraceptives)

D Tics
Motor
Posthypoxic
Phonic
Epilepsy (juvenile
Motor! phonic;
myoclonic epilepsy,
consider
progressive myoclonic
Tourette’s
epilepsies)
syndrome
Metabolic (hepatic and
renal failure)
Neurodegenerative diseases
(Alzheimer’s disease,
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease)
Myoclonus-dystonia

C Myoclonus

Heredodegenerative
Wilson’s disease
Neuronal degeneration with
iron accumulation type 1
(aka Hallervorden-Spatz)
Metabolic and storage
disorders
Parkinsonian syndromes
Huntington’s disease

Primary Inherited
DYT-1 (Oppenheim’s dystonia)
Dopa-responsive dystonia

Secondary
Perinatal injury (cerebral palsy,
kernicterus, delayed-onset dystonia)
CNS lesions (vascular malformations,
stroke, tumor, head trauma)
Infectious, postinfectious
Drug (dopaminomimetic, dopamine,
antagonists, antidepressants)
Toxin (manganese, carbon monoxide)

