HYPONATREMIA

Hyponatremia is defined as a plasma sodium level !135
mEq/L (135 mmol/L) and is the most commonly encountered electrolyte abnormality in hospitalized patients
(prevalence of approximately 2.5%). Acute or symptomatic hyponatremia can lead to significant rates of morbidity and mortality.
A. Clinical features depend on the degree of hyponatremia
and the rapidity with which they develop. An abrupt
(over 24–48 hours) decrease in the sodium concentration may be associated with symptoms that range from
mild anorexia, headache, and muscle cramps to significant alteration in mental status, including obtundation,
coma, or status epilepticus. The key diagnostic challenge is to clinically predict total body sodium content.
Patients who are hypervolemic have increased total
body sodium; patients who are euvolemic have normal
body sodium; and patients who are hypovolemic have
low body sodium. Hypovolemic hyponatremia develops
as sodium (and free water) are lost and replaced by inappropriately hypotonic fluids. Sodium can be lost through
renal or nonrenal routes. Nonrenal routes include GI
losses, excessive sweating, third spacing of fluids (e.g.,
ascites, peritonitis, pancreatitis, burns), and cerebral
salt-wasting syndrome. Euvolemic hyponatremia is characterized by normal total body sodium and a total body
excess of free water. This occurs in patients who take in
excess fluids. The most common causes are psychogenic
polydipsia, administration of hypotonic intravenously,
and the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH). Hypervolemic hyponatremia
occurs in patients with excessive total body sodium (e.g.,
with congestive heart failure).
B. SIADH is characterized by maximally dilute urine in the
face of hypoosmolality and hyponatremia. SIADH is the
most common cause of normovolemic (euvolemic) hyponatremia and the most common cause of hyponatremia.
SIADH is caused by an increase of arginine vasopressin
(AVP) secretion resulting in impairment of water excretion. AVP secretion in these patients is caused by a nonphysiologic release of AVP from the posterior pituitary or
another ectopic source. The most common causes of SIADH include neuropsychiatric and pulmonary disease,
malignant tumors, major surgery (postoperative pain),
and pharmacologic agents. Hyponatremia of
SIADH can be explained by the inappropriate secretion
of AVP. AVP or antidiuretic hormone (ADH) increases
water resorption through the renal tubules in order to
376

conserve water. A pathologic increase of AVP often
leads to excessive retention of water. Renal free water
excretion is impaired, whereas the regulation of sodium
balance is unaffected. In addition, a high volume of water
intake is required for significant development of hyponatremia because a high level of AVP alone is usually insufficient to produce hyponatremia. Malignancies may secrete AVP. Also, tumors may cause SIADH secretion by
interfering with the normal osmoregulation of AVP secretion from the neurohypophysis through direct invasion of
the vagus nerve, metastatic implants in the hypothalamus,
or some other more generalized neuropathic changes.
Many drugs may also increase production of AVP either
directly or indirectly by acting on the kidneys. Examples
include chlorpropamide, clofibrate, carbamazepineoxcarbazepine, vincristine, nicotine, narcotics, and
antipsychotic/antidepressant drugs. The most important
diagnostic criterion for SIADH is the excretion of inappropriately concentrated urine ("300 mOsm/kg H2O)
despite hypoosmolality and hyponatremia. The absence
of any renal, adrenal, or thyroid abnormalities also is important. Appropriate renal response to hypoosmolality is
to excrete the maximum volume of dilute urine (i.e., urine
osmolality and specific gravity of !100 mOsm/kg and
1.003, respectively). Patients with primary polydipsia will
have an appropriate response to the water loading. An
inappropriate renal response often implies AVP action on
the kidneys. Patients with SIADH tend to be mildly volume expanded secondary to water retention and have a
urine sodium excretion rate equal to intake (urine sodium
concentration usually "40 mmol/L). Hypouricemia may
be an accompanying finding because of the volume
expansion (in contrast to hypovolemic hyponatremia).
Evaluate for an underlying malignancy (SIADH may
precede diagnosis of malignancy by several months). For
treatment of mild hyponatremia, water restriction of
1000 ml/day should be adequate. However, patient compliance may be difficult because of the lengthy periods of
water restriction that may be required. Pharmacologic
agents that antagonize AVP action and maneuvers that
increase solute excretion may allow patients with SIADH
secretion to drink more water (e.g., demeclocycline).
The recommended demeclocycline dose is between
600 and 1200 mg/day with restoration of serum sodium in
5–14 days without restricting water intake. Patients with
cirrhosis require dosage adjustments because of fear of
developing toxicity. For severe symptomatic hyponatremia 3% hypertonic saline is recommended.

377
Patient with HYPONATREMIA

A Determine plasma
osmolality*

Assessment of extracellular fluid volume
by history and physical examination

Measure urine Na concentration

B Exclude renal failure, hypothyroidism,
and adrenal insufficiency

C Body Na: low

Body Na: normal

Body Na: High

*Osmolality # 2 (Na$) $ Plasma glucose/18 $ BUN/2.8 mOsm/kg.

C. The therapeutic strategy for hyponatremia is dictated
by the underlying cause of the disorder. It is important
to consider the presence or absence of symptoms, the
duration of the disorder, and the risk of neurologic
complication. It is ideal to raise the plasma sodium
concentration by restricting water and increasing water
loss. Ultimately, the goal of treatment is to correct the
underlying disorder causing hyponatremia, if possible.
Symptomatic hyponatremia always requires treatment
regardless of severity of the hyponatremia. The issue of
how rapid the correction is still of great controversy.
For patients who are acute (!48 hours) and severely
symptomatic, it is typically recommended to raise the
sodium concentration no more than 1–2 mEq/L/hr for
the first 3–4 hours with a limit at 15 mEq/L but preferably at 12 mEq/L during the first 24 hours with hypertonic saline. Once symptoms have subsided, the rate of
correction can be switched to water restriction. As long
as the osmolality of the fluid administered is higher
than that of the level of plasma, sodium increases. The
quantity of sodium required to increase the plasma sodium concentration by a given amount can be estimated
by multiplying the deficit in plasma sodium concentration by the total body water. The treatment of a patient
with asymptomatic hyponatremia is less controversial.
In patients with chronic hyponatremia, water restriction alone is usually effective. A free water restriction of
1000 ml/day is adequate to achieve negative water balance. In some patients, an even greater restriction of
water intake may be necessary because this volume of
restriction exceeds total renal and extrarenal water
losses. The use of furosemide (40 mg/day) and high salt
intake (200 mEq/day), an extension of the treatment of

acute symptomatic hyponatremia to the chronic management of euvolemic hyponatremia, has also been
reported to be successful.
Patients with hypervolemic hyponatremia, secondary
to heart failure or liver cirrhosis, are often asymptomatic. These patients require strict sodium and water
restriction and correction of any other electrolyte and
metabolic alterations. Patients who have a hypovolemic type of hyponatremia may be treated with isotonic
saline in an attempt to replete sodium and remove the
hemodynamic stimulus for AVP release.
The most important complication in the treatment
of severe hyponatremia is central pontine myelinolysis
(osmotic demyelination syndrome). Demyelinating
syndrome is most likely to occur in patients whose hyponatremia is more chronic and is rapidly corrected
once the adaptive process has set in. Diagnosis can be
difficult with small lesions, but more extensive disease
is associated with flaccid paralysis, dysarthria, and dysphagia. There is no specific treatment for this disorder,
causing a high mortality and morbidity. Because the
rate and magnitude of correction seem to play a critical
role, it is important to adhere to the suggested rate of
correction as stated previously.

References
Adrogué HJ. Consequences of inadequate management of hyponatremia.
Am J Nephrol 2005;25(3):240–249. Epub 2005 May 25.
Adrogué HJ, Madias NE. Hyponatremia. N Engl J Med 2000;342(21):
1581–1589.
Upadhyay A, Jaber BL, Madias NE. Incidence and prevalence of hyponatremia. Am J Med 2006;119(7 Suppl 1):S30–S35.

