HYPOGLYCEMIA
A. Hypoglycemia is possibly the most common metabolic
emergency because insulin-induced hypoglycemia is a
common side effect of treatment of a common disease.
Symptoms of hypoglycemia are partly sympathetic and
related to the release of catecholamines. These symptoms develop as the plasma glucose falls below 55 mg/dl
and include sweating, tremor, hunger, anxiety, fear, and
palpitations. Other symptoms are caused by an insufficient supply of glucose to the brain, resulting in neuroglycopenia with symptoms such as slurred speech,
blurred vision, weakness, and confusion. Neuroglycopenic symptoms, in general, occur when plasma
glucose falls below 50 mg/dl. Symptoms should disappear with treatment.
Treatment of mild episodes of hypoglycemia is intake of fast-absorbing carbohydrates. Severe episodes
can be treated with either IV dextrose or glucagon injected intramuscularly or intravenously. The glycemic
response and recovery of a normal level of consciousness is 1–2 minutes slower after glucagon than after
glucose.
B. Patients receiving treatment for diabetes mellitus experience hypoglycemia when there is a mismatch between
insulin levels (either exogenous insulin or as induced by
sulfonylureas) and metabolic demands. Patients with
hypoglycemia should have their records examined and
insulin dosing and timing adjusted to reduce the risk of
hypoglycemia without compromising overall glucose
control. As targets for glycemic control have progressively declined, the incidence of hypoglycemia has increased. Patients with poor glucose control become
symptomatic with adrenergic symptoms of hypoglycemia at progressively higher glucose thresholds, often
when the plasma glucose is !100 mg/dl. When a sulfonylurea is implicated, its use should be reevaluated
within the context of the patient’s needs and alternative
or shorter-acting agents should be considered. Because
sulfonylureas have an extended half-life, patients with a
sulfonylurea-induced symptomatic hypoglycemic event
should not be discharged from the hospital until at least
24 hours have passed.
C. Ethanol is another common cause of hypoglycemia. In a
nondiabetic person who has had an insufficient intake of
food for 1 or 2 days, hypoglycemia will typically develop
6–24 hours after a moderate or heavy intake of ethanol.
Drugs that are reported to induce hypoglycemia include
salicylates in large doses, quinine, haloperidol, pentamidine, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.
126

D. Patients with hypoglycemic symptoms who are not
known to have diabetes should be provided with a
home glucometer and instructed in its use so that
glucose measures can be taken at the time when
symptoms are experienced. If hypoglycemia is confirmed by review of the glucometer data or clinical
suspicion is high, a prolonged supervised fast is the
most reliable test for establishing the diagnosis.
Symptoms that occur in the presence of a normal
glucose level eliminate the need for further evaluation for hypoglycemia.
A supervised fast is performed to confirm that the
symptoms result from hypoglycemia and that reversing
it relieves the symptoms. The fast begins at the time of
last food ingestion, which can be the evening meal on
the previous day. Patients are provided with caloriefree and caffeine-free drinks and should remain active.
Blood samples for plasma glucose, insulin, C-peptide,
and proinsulin are drawn every 6 hours; these assays
are not performed unless the glucose is "60 mg/dl.
The testing frequency increases to hourly if any of
these glucose levels drop below 60 mg/dl. The fast is
ended when the plasma glucose drops below 45 mg/dl,
if the patient has symptoms or signs of hypoglycemia,
or when 72 hours have elapsed. Blood is drawn to test
for the presence of sulfonylureas, IV glucose is given,
and the patient is fed.
E. Insulin levels !6 #U/ml when the plasma glucose is
"55 mg/dl are considered inappropriate insulin levels.
Plasma C-peptide and proinsulin levels help distinguish
exogenous from endogenous insulin sources: C-peptide
and proinsulin levels should correlate with the insulin
level when the insulin source is endogenous. Endogenous hyperinsulinemia can result from treatment with
sulfonylureas; these can be detected in the plasma.
Long-acting sulfonylureas are particularly high risk
when prescribed to older patients.
F. Insulin-producing tumors, insulinomas, and non–islet
cell tumors may be underlying causes of hypoglycemia
in people without diabetes. When suggested by the
results of a fast, insulinoma should be further investigated in consultation with an endocrinologist or endocrine surgeon. Endoscopic ultrasound is recommended
for tumor identification. Intraoperative ultrasound or a
selective arterial calcium-infusion test may be required
to identify the source because these tumors are often
extremely small.

127
Patient with HYPOGLYCEMIA

A Symptoms
Confirm glucose "60 mg/dl

B Diabetes

Seek contributing
factors or adjust
insulin dosing

C Drug effect

Ethanol
Salicylates
Haloperidol
Pentamidine
Trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole

D Not known

to be diabetic

H Postprandial

hypoglycemia
Surgery
Early diabetes

Fasting glucose
"45 mg/dl

E Insulin !6 #U/ml

C-peptide
"200 mg/dl

Exogenous
insulin

Insulin "6 #U/ml

G IGF-mediated

C-peptide
!200 mg/dl

$ Sulfonylurea
screen

Sulfonylurea
effect

G. Fasting hypoglycemia that is not associated with hyperinsulinemia is most often found in the presence of
advanced disease such as renal or liver failure or malnutrition. It may be a presentation of adrenal insufficiency. Nonpancreatic tumors may induce hypoglycemia through the paraneoplastic secretion of insulinlike
growth factor-2 or its precursor.
H. Most patients with autonomic symptoms after eating
do not have hypoglycemia, and normal individuals can
develop glucose levels of "50 mg/dl after eating. Postprandial hypoglycemia can occur among patients who
have undergone bariatric surgery and early in diabetes
mellitus in which the insulin secretion becomes dysregulated.

Noninsulin-mediated
hypoglycemia

% Sulfonylurea
screen

F Insulinoma

References
Palardy J, Havrankova J, Lepage R, et al. Blood glucose measurements
during symptomatic episodes in patients with suspected postprandial
hypoglycemia. N Engl J Med 1989;321:1421.
Proye CA, Lokey JS. Current concepts in functioning endocrine tumors
of the pancreas. World J Surg 2004;28(12):1231–1238.
Service FJ. Classification of hypoglycemic disorders. Endocrinol Metab
Clin North Am 1999;28(3):501–517, vi.
Service FJ. Diagnostic approach to adults with hypoglycemic disorders.
Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 1999;28(3):519–532.
Thompson GB. Diagnosis and management of insulinomas. Endocr Pract
2002;8(5):385–386.

