HYPOKALEMIA

Total body potassium (K!) is estimated to be 3500 mmol.
More than 98% of K! is intracellular, with the highest
contents in skeletal muscle and liver cells. Therefore,
a shift of relatively small amounts of K! to or from the
intracellular pool can have a substantial effect on the
extracellular and serum K! levels. The daily intake of
potassium varies considerably, with an average daily intake of approximately 70–140 mmol in the United States.
Despite this variation, the serum K! level is tightly maintained between 3.5 and 5.0 mmol/L. This is achieved
through homeostatic mechanisms known as external and
internal potassium balance. At steady state, the total daily
intake in a healthy person is excreted primarily through
the urine (approximately 90%–95%) and stool (approximately 5%–10%); this is known as external potassium
balance. The rate of potassium excretion by the kidney is
related primarily to the flow rate, intraluminal charge, and
K! concentration in the cortical collecting duct (CCD)
segment of the nephron. Kidneys require several hours
before they can excrete the added potassium load.
The movement of potassium between intracellular and
extracellular fluids is also crucial in maintaining a tight serum
K! level and is known as internal potassium balance. This
shift is important because it is the first line of defense when
large amounts of potassium enter the circulation over a relatively short period (e.g., following the ingestion of a meal
high in potassium). Whereas the main route for potassium
entrance and accumulation into the cells is Na-K-ATPase,
the main exit mechanism is through potassium channels. The
two major stimulants for the movement of potassium into the
cells are insulin and agonists of the "2-adrenergic receptor.
Acid-base disorders can affect the serum K! concentration through both internal and external potassium balance;
however, two general rules apply. In chronic acid-base
disorders, the effect of external potassium balance is
dominant. The effect of acidemia on internal potassium
balance is stronger than that of alkalemia for any given
change in pH, with this effect being limited primarily to
nonorganic acidoses.
A. Hypokalemia is defined as a serum K! level #3.5
mmol/L and is one of the most common electrolyte
disorders. It can be associated with either a decreased
or a normal total body potassium content. It is important to remember that the cause of hypokalemia can be
multifactorial, with the involvement of more than one
mechanism or etiology. Although the cause of hypokalemia in the majority of cases is obvious from history,
physical examination, and/or basic laboratory tests,
380

B.

C.

D.

E.

F.

hypokalemia that is not resolved by the proper initial
intervention requires a more rigorous workup to detect
and correct the underlying cause; simply replacing
potassium will not be sufficient.
Look carefully for symptoms and signs such as muscle
weakness and ECG changes (e.g., flattened T wave,
prominent U waves) suggestive of an impending emergency requiring immediate treatment.
Pseudohypokalemia is a condition in which a large
number of abnormal leukocytes, seen mainly in patients
with myelogenous leukemia, take up plasma potassium
when the blood sample is kept at room temperature for
a relatively long period.
The history should include information about medications (particularly diuretics, laxatives, antibiotics such as
certain penicillins and amphotericin B, chemotherapeutic agents such as cisplatin, and "2-agonists), diet (e.g.,
potassium intake and supplements such as licorice, which
has aldosterone-like effects), associated symptoms (e.g.,
diarrhea, vomiting, continuous gastric drainage, and profuse sweating), medical history, family history, and highstress conditions such as head trauma or myocardial infarction. Physical examination should be directed toward
vital signs (blood pressure in particular), volume status,
and signs of disorders associated with hypokalemia such
as hyperaldosteronism and Cushing’s syndrome. Initial
laboratory tests should include kidney function tests;
electrolyte profile, including calcium and magnesium;
ABG; CBC; osmolality; and urinary pH, osmolality, creatinine, and electrolyte profile, including Na!, K!, and
Cl-. In some cases, urinary Mg2! and Ca2! and plasma
renin and aldosterone levels may also be helpful. Of
note, low magnesium can enhance renal potassium excretion through a mechanism that is still unclear, and the
magnesium level needs to be corrected along with the
potassium levels.
High levels of either exogenous or endogenous (e.g.,
following myocardial infarction and alcohol withdrawal)
"2-adrenergic agonists are major causes of K! shift
into the cells.
Kidneys are unable to reduce the potassium excretion
to zero, even in the case of no potassium intake. Therefore, in the case of severe reduced intake (e.g., almost
no potassium intake with a diet of tea and toast), kidneys will continue to excrete low levels of potassium
(usually #10 mmol/L) and hypokalemia will eventually
ensue. This is, however, not common, because it requires a virtually potassium-free diet of relatively long
duration.
(Continued on page 382)

381
Patient with HYPOKALEMIA

A Hypokalemia

(serum K! #3.5 mmol/L)

C Pseudohypokalemia

B Emergency
Yes

No

No

Move to therapy

D History, physical examination,

Yes
No further workup

and basic laboratory tests

E Clear evidence of

F Clear evidence
of low intake

Yes
Treat accordingly
and reevaluate

transcellular shift

No

No
Urine K!

Cont’d on p 383

Insulin excess
"2-Adrenergic agonists
Familial hypokalemic
periodic paralysis
Hyperthyroidism
Barium intoxication
Theophylline
Chloroquine

Yes
Treat accordingly

382
G. The main route of extrarenal potassium loss is the
GI tract in the form of diarrhea or GI fistulas. Although
gastric fluid contains potassium (6–8 mmol/L), hypokalemia associated with vomiting or continuous gastric
drainage mainly results from renal potassium loss in the
setting of metabolic alkalosis and volume contraction.
Sweat contains approximately 5–10 mmol/L of potassium; therefore, hypokalemia may occur with profuse
sweating. In patients with normal kidney function, extrarenal K! loss is associated with a urinary K! loss
of #15 mmol/day.
H. The interpretation of renal excretion of potassium
should be based on the serum K! level, such that renal
potassium excretion should be minimal in the setting
of hypokalemia.
I. Transtubular potassium gradient (TTKG) is used to
estimate the potassium concentration at the end of
CCD. It is useful only if the osmolality of the urine

exceeds that of the plasma and if the sodium concentration in urine is at least 25 mEq/L. TTKG can be
calculated from the following equation:
Urine K!/plasma K!
Urine osmolality/plasma osmolality
Normal values for TTKG vary and depend on the
serum K! levels; for hypokalemia, values are #2; for
hyperkalemia, values are $6; and for normokalemia,
any number is considered normal.

References
Gennary FJ. Hypokalemia. N Engl J Med 1998;339:451–458.
Mount DB, Zandi-Nejad K. Disorders of potassium balance. In Brenner
BM, ed. Brenner and Rector’s The Kidney, 7th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier, 2004:997–1040.

383
Patient with HYPOKALEMIA
(Cont’d from p 381)
Urine K!

#15 mmol/day or #15 mmol/g Cr

$15 mmol/g Cr or $15 mmol/day

H Renal loss

G Extrarenal loss/remote renal loss

I TTKG

Acid-base status

Metabolic acidosis

Normal

Metabolic alkalosis

GI K! loss

Profuse sweating

Remote diuretic use
Remote vomiting or
stomach drainage
Profuse sweating

$4

#2

↑ Distal (CCD)
K! secretion

↑ Tubular flow

Blood pressure
and/or volume

Osmotic diuresis

Low or normal

High

Acid-base status

Aldosterone

Variable
Nonreabsorbable
anions other than
HCO3%
Hippurate
Penicillin

Low

High
Metabolic acidosis
RTA type 1
RTA type 2
DKA
Amphotericin B
Acetazolamide

Metabolic alkalosis

Renin
Cortisol
High

Urine CI% (mmol/L)

RAS
RST
Malignant
hypertension
$20

#10

Urine Ca/Cr
(molar ratio)

Vomiting
Chloride diarrhea

$0.20

#0.15

Loop diuretic
Bartter’s syndrome

Thiazide diuretic
Gitelman’s syndrome

Low
High

Normal

Cushing’s
syndrome

Liddle’s
syndrome
Licorice
AME

PA
GRA

AME, Apparent mineralocorticoid excess; DKA, diabetic ketoacidosis; GRA, glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism; PA, primary
aldosteronism; RAS, renin-angiotensin system; RST, renin-secreting tumor; RTA, renal tubular acidosis.

