HYPOPHOSPHATEMIA

Phosphorus is a critical component of many cellular compounds (e.g., phospholipids of the cell membrane, nucleic
acid, adenosine triphospate [ATP], 2,3-diphosphoglycerate
[2,3-DPG]) and plays a key role in an array of metabolic
processes. Consequently it is under tight regulatory control.
Serum levels of phosphate depend on dietary intake, intestinal absorption, bone turnover, cellular shifts, and renal
tubular handling. Homeostasis is maintained primarily by
parathyroid hormone (PTH) and vitamin D. The total body
phosphorus in a 70-kg adult is estimated to be 700 g: 85% is
in the skeleton, 15% is in the soft tissue, and 0.1% is in the
extracellular fluid.
A. Hypophosphatemia is defined as a plasma phosphate
level !2.5 mg/dl. Causes of hypophosphatemia are
shown in Table 1. Hypophosphatemia can occur when
there are increased losses, decreased intake, or cellular
shifts of phosphate. In order to delineate among the
causes, it is important to obtain a thorough history,
physical examination, and laboratory evaluation. Hypophosphatemia secondary to decreased input occurs
Table 1 Causes of Hypophosphatemia
Increased Losses of Phosphate
Acquired
Hyperparathyroidism
Vitamin D deficiency
Renal tubular disease
Extracellular volume expansion
Diuretics (acetazolamide, thiazides)
Osmotic diuresis
Renal transplant
Administration of bicarbonate
Corticosteroids
Hereditary
Fanconi’s syndrome
X-chromosome–linked hypophosphatemia
Autosomal-dominant hypophosphatemic rickets
Type 1 distal renal tubular acidosis
Redistribution of Phosphate
Acute respiratory alkalosis
Insulin administration in DKA or HONK
Refeeding of malnourished patients (alcoholics, anorexia)
TPN without phosphate administration
Hungry bone syndrome (after parathyroidectomy or thyroidectomy in
the setting of osteopenia)
Increased cellular synthesis
Increased cellular metabolism
Oncogenic hypophosphatemic osteomalacia
Decreased Intake of Phosphate
Vitamin D deficiency
Malabsorption
Alcoholism
Poor nutrition
Antacids containing Mg and Al
Diarrhea/steatorrhea

392

when there is decreased oral intake or intestinal absorption. Hypophosphatemia resulting from poor intake is uncommon, because phosphorus is plentiful in
the diet. It can occur, however, when an individual has
been chronically and severely malnourished. Malabsorption of phosphorus is often secondary to inflammatory states, surgery, or diarrhea. The most common
cause of hypophosphatemia is chronic alcoholism.
Over 50% of the hospitalized alcoholics become hypophosphatemic when they are unable to eat for a period
of days or develop an alcohol withdrawal state. Increased renal clearance of phosphorus occurs in primary hyperparathyroidism, vitamin D deficiency, vitamin D–resistant and vitamin D–dependent rickets,
hyperglycemic states, and oncogenic osteomalacia.
There are acquired and hereditary conditions that lead
to increased losses of phosphate. Intracellular shifts of
phosphorus by insulin infusion can cause an abrupt fall
in serum phosphorus, but this is usually transient and
usually does not result in a profound deficiency. Finally, cellular shifts can cause hypophosphatemia. This
is most often seen with the administration of glucose
or total parenteral nutrition (TPN) in malnourished
patients. A rise in insulin causes phosphate to move
to the intracellular compartment. Additionally, the
increased anabolism leads to the formation of highenergy phosphate bonds, further depleting phosphate
levels. A similar mechanism is involved in hypophosphatemia resulting from insulin administration in treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) or hyperglycemic
hyperosmolar nonketotic coma (HONK).
B. The clinical manifestations of hypophosphatemia depend on the severity and duration of low plasma
phosphate levels. Patients with moderate hypophosphatemia (1.5–2.5 mg/dl) are generally asymptomatic.
Those with severe hypophosphatemia (!1.5 mg/dl)
can have metabolic encephalopathy, bone pain, or
symptoms secondary to muscle dysfunction (decreased strength, rhabdomyolysis, cardiomyopathy,
respiratory failure). Hypophosphatemic patients may
also demonstrate hematologic abnormalities (hemolysis secondary to decreased 2,3-DGP and ATP levels,
leukocyte dysfunction, thrombocytopenia). When deciding how to manage hypophosphatemia, it is important to keep in mind that serum levels of phosphate
do not necessarily reflect total body stores. Hypophosphatemia can occur when total stores are low,
normal, or high. Clinically significant hypophosphatemia tends to occur when there is a total-body deficit
of phosphorus.

393
Patient with HYPOPHOSPHATEMIA
History, physical, laboratory studies

A Hypophosphatemia
(!2.5 mg/dl)

B Moderate

B Severe

(1.5 mg/dl-2.5 mg/dl)

No symptoms

(!1.5 mg/dl)

No symptoms and
failure of oral therapy

Symptoms

IV therapy

IV therapy

C Oral therapy

" symptoms

IV therapy

C Identify and treat underlying cause

Increased losses

Acquired

Hereditary

Consider:
Renal tubular disease
Hyperparathyroidism
Vitamin D deficiency

Consider:
Fanconi’s
Distal RTA
X-chromosome–linked
hypophosphatemia
Autosomal dominant
hypophospatemic
rickets

Decreased intake

Cellular shifts

Consider:
Starvation
Malabsorption
Antacids
Poor nutrition

Consider:
Hungry bone syndrome
Refeeding syndrome
Increased cellular metabolism

C. Phosphorus can be replaced orally or parenterally. Orally
is considered safer. Oral therapies include phosphatecontaining salts (sodium phosphate or potassium phosphate) and dairy products (e.g., milk contains 1 mg/ml of
phosphorus). Generally, for oral replacement, 60 mmol
of phosphate per day in 3–4 divided doses of the preparation of choice, given over 7–10 days is sufficient to
correct moderate hypophosphatemia. Parenteral therapy
is usually reserved for severe hypophosphatemia or for
those who do not tolerate or respond to oral preparations. IV formulations include sodium phosphate and
potassium phosphate. A common regimen is 2.5 mg/kg
body weight of phosphate over 6 hours in severe hypophosphatemia without overt clinical manifestations,
and 5.0 mg/kg body weight over 6 hours in hypophosphatemic emergencies. Phosphate repletion can have
side effects. When phosphate-containing salts are
used, patients need to be followed closely for hypernatremia, hyperkalemia, hyperphosphatemia, and volume
overload. With oral salt supplements patients may have

diarrhea. This can be avoided by administering divided
doses. During parenteral repletion it is also important to
monitor the calcium phosphate product. Overaggressive
repletion can lead to metastatic calcium deposition and
hypocalcemia.
In addition to correcting plasma levels of phosphorus, the underlying causes of hypophosphatemia need
to be identified and treated.
References
Gaasbeek A, Meinders AE. Hypophosphatemia: an update on its
etiology and treatment. Am J Med 2005;118(10):1094–1101.
Knochel JP. Disorders of phosphorous metabolism. In Fauci AS et al, eds.
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 14th ed. New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1998:2259–2262.
Marinella, MA. Refeeding syndrome and hypophosphatemia. J Intensive
Care Med 2005;20(3):155–159.
Paterson CR, Naismith KI, Young JA. Severe unexplained hypophosphatemia. Clin Chem 1992;38(1):104–107.
Subramanian R, Khardori R. Severe hypophosphatemia: pathophysiologic
implications, clinical presentations, and treatment. Medicine (Baltimore)
2000;79(1):1–8.

