HYPOTHERMIA


The most common presentation of hypothermia is accidental. A few deaths each year from hypothermia are attributed to homicide and suicide. By definition, hypothermia
is a core temperature !35° C, yet patients with the same
core temperature may manifest signs and symptoms of
hypothermia very differently. The most important variables
influencing the outcome of patients with hypothermia are
age, comorbidities, duration of cold exposure, nutritional
status, medication use, or intoxicant use. Accidental hypothermia usually occurs when the normal compensatory
mechanisms to heat loss are overwhelmed by exposure.
When a patient has impaired compensatory mechanisms,
hypothermia is more severe and likely to be fatal.
Initial therapy is directed at treating the underlying
cause of the hypothermia and passive and active rewarming. It is important to recognize that hypothermia may be
a manifestation of severe systemic disease, such as sepsis,
stroke, cardiovascular accident, acute coronary syndrome,
or myxedema coma.
A. All patients with symptomatic hypothermia should receive warm humidified supplemental oxygen; be placed
on a cardiac monitor; receive IV access and administration of warm IV fluids (patients with symptomatic hypothermia are typically dehydrated); receive an ECG
and laboratory studies, including a CBC, electrolytes,
coagulation studies, and liver function studies; and
have continuous temperature measurement. Patients
with a failure to protect their airway or failure to oxygenate or ventilate may be safely intubated. ABG
analysis is highly inaccurate in patients with hypothermia and should not guide management or therapy.
B. The initial cardiac response to hypothermia is tachycardia followed by bradycardia. Patients with a stable
cardiac rhythm (including sinus bradycardia) and
stable vital signs may undergo passive rewarming with

648

blankets to prevent further heat loss. Noninvasive
internal modalities may be used (warmed, humidified
oxygen and warmed IV fluids), or warming blankets
may be helpful.
C. Patients with cardiovascular instability need to be rapidly
rewarmed using a combination of methods. Core warming (warming the heart before the extremities) must be
used. Gastric/bladder/colon lavage, peritoneal lavage
with warmed dialysate, or chest tube thoracostomy with
warm saline irrigation should be considered in severe
cases. Patients with severe hypothermia should receive
extracorporeal blood warming with partial cardiopulmonary bypass if available. Continue warmed O2, IV fluids,
and blankets. For ventricular fibrillation or asystole,
follow Advanced Cardiac Life Support guidelines. The
hypothermic myocardium is often refractory to atropine,
pacing, and defibrillation.
D. Prolonged resuscitation until the patient is actively
rewarmed is typically indicated with the caveat that it
will be impossible to fully restore patients to normal
body temperature during cardiac arrest.
E. All patients with hemodynamic instability and hypothermia require intensive care unit (ICU) admission
and should be observed for a minimum of 24 hours on
a cardiac monitor once rewarming is complete and the
patient is asymptomatic.

References
Danzl D, Pozos R. Accidental hypothermia. N Engl J Med
1994;331:1756.
Danzy D. Accidental hypothermia. In Marx JA, Hockeberger RS, Walls
RM, eds. Rosen’s Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice. 5th ed. St. Louis: Mosby, 2002.
Ulrich AS. Hypothermia and localized cold injuries. Emerg Med Clin
North Am 2004;22(2):281–298.

649
Patient with HYPOTHERMIA
Exposure?

Yes

No

Core temperature

Treat underlying cause
(stroke, sepsis, CVA, ACS)

Core temperature
!35° C

Core temperature
"35° C

B Passive rewarming

A Remove cold and

wet clothing
ECG
IV access
Laboratory studies
(CBC, electrolytes)
Airway protection

C Cardiovascular instability?

Yes

No

Combination of active
external and internal
rewarming

Active external
rewarming

D Prolonged resuscitation
until patient actively
rewarmed

E ICU admission

