HYPOTENSION
Hypotension can result in multiorgan dysfunction if not
treated immediately. As a result, diagnostic assessments
and therapeutic maneuvers should occur rapidly and
simultaneously.
A. Initially, a rapid assessment should be made to identify
patients who are critically ill and unresponsive or who
are clinically unstable. For these patients, Basic and
Advanced Cardiac Life Support protocols should be
immediately initiated.
B. Clinical examination, laboratory data, and noninvasive
tests should be used to distinguish between cardiogenic
and noncardiogenic causes of hypotension because the
management of each one is markedly different. Careful
attention to volume and perfusion status can help differentiate etiologies.
C. Invasive hemodynamic monitoring with pulmonary
artery (PA) catheterization can help differentiate among
different causes of hypotension. PA catheters should be
used prudently because there is no indication from
clinical trials that they provide clinical benefit when
used routinely. (CO, cardiac output; PCWP, pulmonary
capillary wedge pressure; SVR, systemic vascular resistance; PVR, pulmonary vascular resistance.)
D. Cardiogenic shock most commonly results from large
myocardial infarctions (MIs; !40% of left ventricle)
leading to pump failure. Mechanical complications of
MI, including right ventricular dysfunction, acute mitral regurgitation, septal rupture, and free-wall rupture,
can also lead to cardiogenic shock. In patients with
mechanical complications, urgent surgical repair is
needed. Other cardiac causes of cardiogenic hypotension include pericardial tamponade, severe obstructive
valvular heart disease, and progression of a chronic
cardiomyopathy. Urgent echocardiography is particularly helpful in delineating the causes of cardiogenic
shock.
E. In cardiogenic shock from acute MI, urgent coronary
revascularization is indicated, often with support of
an intraaortic balloon pump (IABP). For initial stabilization and for treatment of ongoing cardiogenic
shock, inotropic support may be initiated with
dobutamine or dopamine (dobutamine is generally

76

preferred because dopamine has significant chronotropic and vasoconstrictive properties that may worsen
cardiac ischemia). If hypotension still persists, other
drugs such as milrinone or norepinephrine may be
tried.
F. Causes of vasodilatory hypotension include sepsis, adrenal crisis, drug effects, anaphylaxis, and neurogenic
shock and require treatment of the underlying pathologic process and supportive treatment with volume
resuscitation and IV vasopressors. Notably, volume resuscitation is the first-line supportive treatment for
sepsis because sepsis is associated with hypovolemic
hypotension. However, sepsis can also be associated
with a cardiomyopathy, and this may limit the amount of
volume resuscitation that can be administered.
G. Obstructive hypotension is most commonly caused by
massive pulmonary thromboembolism. Treatment
options include thrombolytic therapy or surgical
embolectomy. Supportive measures involving volume
resuscitation, vasopressors, and inotropes should
be used cautiously because they may augment right
ventricular strain.
H. The management of hypovolemic hypotension should
involve volume resuscitation and treatment of the cause
of intravascular volume loss (e.g., bleeding, diarrhea,
third-space sequestration). Crystalloids, colloid-containing
solutions, or blood products can be used for volume resuscitation; however, there is no clinical benefit to using
colloid-containing solutions over crystalloids.
References
Connors AF Jr, Speroff T, Dawson NV, et al. The effectiveness of
right heart catheterization in the initial care of critically ill patients.
SUPPORT Investigators. JAMA 1996;276:889–897.
Finfer S, Bellomo R, Boyce N, et al. A comparison of albumin and saline
for fluid resuscitation in the intensive care unit. N Engl J Med
2004;350:2247–2256.
Goldhaber SZ, Haire WD, Feldstein ML, et al. Alteplase versus
heparin in acute pulmonary embolism: randomised trial assessing
right-ventricular function and pulmonary perfusion. Lancet
1993;341:507–511.
Hochman JS, Sleeper LA, Webb JG, et al. Early revascularization in
acute myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic shock. SHOCK
Investigators. Should we emergently revascularize occluded coronaries
for cardiogenic shock? N Engl J Med 1999;341:625–634.

77
Patient with HYPOTENSION

A Assess stability

Stable

Unstable
Basic/Advanced Cardiac
Life Support protocol

B Etiology

Unclear

D Cardiogenic

C Invasive hemodynamic monitoring

Noncardiogenic

Cardiogenic Vasodilatory Obstructive Hypovolemic
CO

↓

↑

↓

↓

PCWP

↑

−↓

−↓

↓

SVR

↑

↓

↑−

↑

PVR

−

−

↑

−

E Acute ischemia
Urgent catheterization
IABP
Dobutamine
Other inotropes

F Vasodilatory G Obstructive H Hypovolemic
Fluids
Vasopressors

Other
Inotropes
Treat underlying
cause

Thrombolysis
Thrombectomy

Fluids

