HYPOCALCEMIA

Hypocalcemia is a consequence of excess calcium loss
(into tissue, urine, or bone) or binding, or a problem with a
calcium source (GI or bone). Parathyroid hormone (PTH)
works to maintain calcium levels by releasing calcium from
bone and activates vitamin D to facilitate the absorption of
calcium from the gut.
A. Calcium is necessary for normal neuromuscle activity,
and hypocalcemia can be associated with paresthesias
and carpopedal spasm. Latent tetany can be elucidated
by tapping on the facial nerve (Chvostek’s sign) or leaving a sphygmomanometer inflated to above the systolic
pressure for 5 minutes on the arm and observing for
hand and arm spasm (Trousseau’s sign). The examination should look for signs of chronic hypocalcemia such
as hypertension, dystonia, ataxia, dementia, malnutrition, dry skin, dermatitis, sparse and brittle hair, cataracts, and papilledema. With severe hypocalcemia, the
ECG becomes abnormal, most typically with a prolonged QT interval.
B. Hypoalbuminemia is associated with lower serum
calcium concentrations but normal ionized calcium
levels. Simple correction formulas adjusting for the
serum albumin (e.g., corrected calcium ! serum
calcium (mg/dl) ! 0.8[4−serum albumin (g/dl)])
generally suffice in estimating ionized calcium if a
direct measurement is not readily available. When
possible, ionized calcium, phosphate, and 25-vitamin
D levels should be measured.
C. In patients who are critically ill, the differential diagnosis of hypocalcemia narrows. Acute hyperphosphatemia
(caused by acute renal failure, rhabdomyolysis, or tumor
lysis, for example) causes acute hypocalcemia directly.
Pancreatitis that is sufficiently severe to cause hypocalcemia (by forming soaps in the pancreatic bed) is usually
obvious. Acute respiratory alkalosis, which increases
calcium binding to albumin in the blood, reduces ionized calcium levels. Magnesium is critical for the efflux
of PTH, and hypomagnesemia induces both a deficiency
of and resistance to the effect of PTH. Hypomagnesemia is most commonly found in patients with a history
of heavy alcohol abuse or malabsorption or in those receiving parenteral nutrition. Administer IV calcium to

132

D.

E.

F.

G.

patients who are symptomatic and treat the underlying
disease.
Renal disease is associated with hyperphosphatemia
due to impaired glomerular filtration and reduced
1-alpha hydroxylase activity, which result in chronic
hypocalcemia. This chronic hypocalcemia typically
results in secondary or tertiary hyperparathyroidism,
so PTH levels are high.
Persistent hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia is,
in the absence of renal failure or increased tissue
breakdown, virtually diagnostic of either postsurgical or idiopathic hypoparathyroidism. The PTH level
in these patients is low. Idiopathic hypoparathyroidism is a rare condition that may be isolated or associated with familial polyglandular endocrinopathy
type 2 (mucocutaneous candidiasis, Addison’s disease, or hypoparathyroidism). It usually presents in
childhood. Other rare causes of hypoparathyroidism
include DiGeorge syndrome, Wilson’s disease, and
hemochromatosis. Head and neck surgery, primarily
for thyroid or parathyroid diseases, and rarely radiation therapy, can result in transient or sometimes
permanent PTH deficiency that may not develop
immediately. Pseudohypoparathyroidism should be
considered in patients with the appropriate
phenotype (such as short metacarpals) and signs of
resistance to other glycoprotein hormones.
Hypocalcemia associated with low phosphate and low
25-vitamin D usually indicates an absorptive problem.
Differential diagnoses that should be considered
include malabsorption states (sprue, short bowel,
regional enteritis), hepatobiliary disease, anticonvulsant
therapy, and vitamin D deficiency or resistance states.
Bisphosphonates can induce hypocalcemia if vitamin
D stores are low.
Treatment includes adequate replacement of calcium,
magnesium, and vitamin D. In conditions in which
conversion of vitamin D to 1,25-vitamin D is perturbed
(i.e., renal disease, vitamin D–resistant rickets), replacement with calcitriol or a similar metabolite is
necessary. Vitamin D deficiency syndromes can be
treated with high-dose vitamin D (such as 50,000 U
given orally once every 2 weeks).

133
Patient with HYPOCALCEMIA

A

B Physical examination

Confirm with ionized calcium
Measure phosphate, magnesium,
and 25-vitamin D

C Critical illness
Hyperphosphatemia
Acute respiratory alkalosis
Sepsis
Pancreatitis
Severe burns
Rhabdomyolysis
Tumor lysis syndrome

D Elevated PTH

Renal failure
Treat underlying disease
Consider IV calcium if
symptomatic

E Low PTH

Postsurgical
hypoparathyroidism
Idiopathic
hypoparathyroidism
Hypomagnesemia

F Low or normal phosphate

Low 25-vitamin D

Malabsorption
Osteomalacia
Bisphosphonate
treatment

G Calcium and
vitamin D
replacement

References
Akerström G, Hellman P, Hessman O, et al. Parathyroid glands in
calcium regulation and human disease. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2005;
1040:53–58.
Brancaccio D, Cozzolino M, Galassi A, et al. Management of secondary
hyperparathyroidism in uremic patients: the role of the new vitamin D
analogs. J Nephrol 2007;20(1):3–9.
Carmeliet G, Van Cromphaut S, Daci E, et al. Disorders of calcium
homeostasis. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab 2003;17(4):
529–546.

Corrado A, Santoro N, Cantatore FP. Extra-skeletal effects of bisphosphonates. Joint Bone Spine 2007;74(1):32–38.
Friedman EA. Consequences and management of hyperphosphatemia in
patients with renal insufficiency. Kidney Int Suppl 2005;(95):S1–7.
Potts JT. Parathyroid hormone: past and present. J Endocrinol
2005;187(3):311–325.
Sedlacek M, Schoolwerth AC, Remillard BD. Electrolyte disturbances in
the intensive care unit. Semin Dial 2006;19(6):496–501.
Tong GM, Rude RK. Magnesium deficiency in critical illness. J Intensive
Care Med 2005;20(1):3–17.

