Involuntary weight loss (IWL) is defined as >5% loss of usual body weight within 6 months. It is significantly associated with older age; poorer health status; smoking; lower body mass index; and, in men, widowhood and less education. It is also associated with higher mortality rates in patients with and without established disease and merits diagnostic and therapeutic intervention.

Clinical studies looking at underlying causes have studied small numbers of patients with wide variability in their demographic characteristics (e.g., age, inpatients vs. outpatients, long-term care residents, veterans). Generalization in the diagnostic approach to IWL is therefore limited in its applicability to different populations.

Diagnostic causes are found in 65%-90% of cases. Inpatients on medical service have a high proportion of physical causes, whereas ambulatory patients are found to have psychiatric disease almost as often as physical causes. Geriatrics studies have shown a high prevalence of both. In 10%-35% of cases, no cause can be found.

A. It is important to document the complaint of weight loss or to look for indirect evidence of weight loss if documentation is unavailable. Many patients complaining of weight loss do not in fact have any documented loss.

B. Common underlying causes include neoplasm, primary gastroenterologic disease, chronic underlying illness (cardiovascular, metabolic, pulmonary), poor nutrition, hyperthyroidism, dementia, depression, and anxiety. Weight loss may precede the diagnosis of dementia. The prevalence of each diagnosis greatly depends on the group being studied.

C. Review risks, symptoms, and examination results for evidence of cancer, diabetes, heart/lung disease, oral/dental disease, GI pathology, hyperthyroidism, infection (including AIDS), alcoholism or other substance abuse, dementia, and psychiatric illness.

D. Physical causes often are apparent early in the investigation. This may not be as applicable to the elderly, in whom disease often presents in nonspecific ways and IWL is more prevalent. Although there are no data to support more aggressive testing in the elderly, it may be reasonable to focus more attention on the oral/dental, gastroenterologic, cognitive, and psychosocial contributions to IWL if the initial evaluation is unrevealing.

E. Whether or not a diagnostic cause is confirmed, the patient with IWL should be followed closely because there is an association with higher mortality and lower health status regardless of specific cause.