IRRITABLE BOWEL SYNDROME


Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a common disease that
affects 10%–15% of the population and is thought to be a
gut motor-sensory disorder, the basis of which is physiologic
but the manifestations of which are affected by various environmental (e.g., foods) and host (e.g., stress, comorbid
illness, prior psychological/physiologic trauma) factors.
Although there are many functional gut diseases, IBS primarily is a disease of colonic dysfunction. Subclassification
of IBS may be helpful in disease management strategies
because the various subtypes are associated with different
treatment choices and pathophysiologic mechanisms. The
subtypes are based on stool consistency alone and include
IBS with constipation (IBS-C), IBS with diarrhea (IBS-D),
IBS mixed type (IBS-M), and IBS unsubtyped (IBS-U).
Patients with IBS-M have both hard and loose stools over
periods of hours or days, whereas IBS patients with alternating bowel habits change subtype over periods of weeks
and months.
A unifying biochemical cause of IBS is not established,
but in many patients the pathophysiology appears to involve
serotonergic signaling of colonic motor and sensory function. There is no laboratory test that can be used to diagnose
IBS. Instead the diagnosis is based on the characteristic
symptoms (Table 1), although it may be necessary to exclude other conditions that can mimic or produce IBS-like
symptoms (e.g., colitis, lactose intolerance, sprue) through
focused laboratory testing. However, routine laboratory
tests are not indicated or necessary to make the diagnosis of
IBS. It is important to assess for “alarm flag” symptoms
(weight loss, GI bleeding, anemia, or nocturnal symptoms)
because these symptoms may indicate underlying serious
diseases and should prompt further diagnostic evaluation.
A. Apply the diagnostic criteria for IBS (see Table 1).
B. Assign the patient to an IBS subtype. Avoid routine diagnostic testing (e.g., CBC, chemistry panel, stool studies,
endoscopy) unless symptom directed. Serologic screening for sprue may be helpful in some patients, and those
with alarm symptoms or those older than age 50 may
need more advanced testing with colonoscopy, etc.

212

C. Reassure the patient that he or she has a common,
benign, and treatable chronic disease that rarely progresses.
D. Avoid aggravating factors such as specific foods, dairy
products, opiates, and NSAIDs. The predominant
symptom or subtype will indicate empirical therapies
to be tried. Empirical therapeutic trials include increased fiber (IBS-C), antidiarrheals (IBS-D), and
antispasmodics.
E. In those not responding to empirical therapy, directed
therapy with serotonin agents (alosetron [IBS-D] or
tegaserod [IBS-C]) or prostaglandins (lubiprostone
[IBS-C]) may be effective.

Table 1: Rome III Diagnostic Criteria for Irritable
Bowel Syndrome
Irritable Bowel Syndrome
At least 3 months, with onset at least 6 months previously of recurrent
abdominal pain or discomfort associated with 2 or more of the following:
• Improvement with defecation; and/or
• Onset associated with a change in frequency of stool; and/or
• Onset associated with a change in form (appearance) of stool

References
Camilleri M, Dubois D, Coulie B, et al. Prevalence and socioeconomic
impact of upper gastrointestinal disorders in the United States: results
of the US Upper Gastrointestinal. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2005;
3(6):543–542.
Drossman DA. The functional gastrointestinal disorders and the Rome
III process. Gastroenterology 2006;130:1377–1390.
Drossman DA, Camilleri M, Mayer EA, Whitehead WE. AGA technical
review on irritable bowel syndrome. Gastroenterology 2002;123:
2108–2131.
Drossman DA, Morris CB, Hu Y, et al. A prospective assessment of bowel
habit in irritable bowel syndrome in women: defining an alternator.
Gastroenterology 2005;128:580–589.
Longstreth GF, Thompson WG, Chey WD, et al. Functional bowel
disorders. Gastroenterology 2006;130:1480–1491.

213
Patient with ABDOMINAL DISCOMFORT WITH ALTERED BOWEL MOTILITY

A Rome diagnostic criteria
for IBS (Table 1)

Positive

Negative

Physical
examination

Consider other
functional GI
disorders

B IBS subtype

See Chronic Diarrhea (p 204)
and Constipation (p 208)

C Directed diagnostic

testing, if necessary

D Constipation
Osmotic Laxative,
Fiber

E Lubiprostone,
tegaserod

D Diarrhea
Loperamide
Diphenoxylate

E Alosetron

