Jaundice is defined as the presence of yellow discoloration of the skin, sclerae, and mucous membranes. This clinical finding results from an elevated serum bilirubin concentration. In general, jaundice is not evident until serum bilirubin concentration exceeds 3 mg/dl. A sequential approach for the diagnosis of jaundice is recommended, which should include a careful history, physical examination, and screening laboratory studies. Once a differential diagnosis is formulated, adequate testing should be directed toward establishing a possible diagnosis.
A. A detailed history must include an assessment of patients' risks factors for intrinsic liver disease, active systemic and abdominal symptoms, medications (including herbs and over-the-counter medications), alcohol consumption, comorbid conditions, prior biliary surgery, and the presence of hereditary liver disease. Physical examination may reveal clues toward a specific condition. For example, high fever or right upper quadrant tenderness suggests cholangitis. Also a palpable gallbladder or a mass may indicate obstructive jaundice from a neoplasm. Intrinsic liver disease is suggested by the presence of ascites; splenomegaly; prominent abdominal veins (consistent with portal hypertension); and signs of chronic liver disease such as spider angiomas, asterixis, and gynecomastia. Initial laboratory studies include serum aspartate and alanine aminotransferase levels (AST, ALT), alkaline phosphatase levels, prothrombin time, albumin levels, and CBC. It is not possible to differentiate intrahepatic from extrahepatic cholestasis on the basis of the serum level of alkaline phosphatase.
B. Initial evaluation of hyperbilirubinemia should determine whether the process is secondary to conjugated (direct) or unconjugated (indirect) bilirubin predominance. In isolated and asymptomatic mild elevation of unconjugated bilirubin, the patient should be evaluated for hemolytic disorders, hereditary disorders of bilirubin metabolism such as Gilbert's or Crigler-Najjar syndrome, and medication-induced disorders (e.g., rifampin).
C. An increase in conjugated bilirubin concentration with abnormal levels of aminotransferases and/or alkaline phosphatase may result from either a hepatocellular cause or the presence of extrahepatic biliary obstruction.
D. Hepatic imaging often complements the findings of the patient's history, physical examination, laboratory studies, and overall clinical presentation. Imaging studies are indicated to confirm the presence or the absence of biliary obstruction. Different accepted modalities to evaluate the biliary system include ultrasonography, CT scan of the abdomen, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP), endoscopic ultrasonography, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), and percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography (PTC). Nuclear imaging of the biliary tree that measures hepatic uptake of radiolabeled derivatives of iminodiacetic acid (e.g., HIDA) is not sensitive enough to justify its use in the evaluation of jaundice.
Even if the clinical suspicion for biliary obstruction is thought to be low, evaluating liver parenchyma is as important as excluding that remote possibility of biliary obstruction. In that case, obtaining a CT scan or ultrasound of the abdomen might be an appropriate diagnostic tool. However, if dilated bile ducts are seen, direct imaging modalities such as MRCP, ERCP, or PTC should be obtained. Altogether, the sensitivity and specificity of these tests is 89%-100%.
E. If there is no clinical evidence of biliary obstruction, evaluation for underlying liver disease is mandatory. Obtain the appropriate screening studies, including viral serologies (hepatitis B and C, acute hepatitis A), serum levels of iron, transferrin saturation and ferritin (for hemochromatosis), antimitochondrial antibodies (for primary biliary cirrhosis), antinuclear antibodies, anti-smooth-muscle antibodies and serum electrophoresis (for autoimmune hepatitis), and alpha-1-antitrypsin activity (alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency). A liver biopsy may be needed to confirm a diagnosis if the previously mentioned serology testing is negative.
F. Once a biliary obstruction is established, therapy is directed toward the relief of the mechanical obstruction. Available endoscopic and radiologic therapies include sphincterotomy, balloon dilation, and stents and drains placement. The optimal strategy depends on the location and the type of obstructing lesion.

