JOINT HYPERMOBILITY


Joint hypermobility is a spectrum of disorders ranging from
the benign to the severe. This chapter will discuss briefly
the range of phenotypes and point out the medically serious
complications that can arise in the more severe phenotypes.
Joint hypermobility is generally quantified by a scoring
system, the Beighton score. One point is accorded for each
of the following: extensibility of the elbow joint !10 degrees, extensibility of the knee joint !10 degrees, the ability
to extend the fifth metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joint to
90 degrees, and the ability to oppose the thumb to the forearm. All of these generate 1 point each; if bilateral, they
generate 2 points each. The last point (of a total of 9 possible
points) is for the ability to place the palms on the floor with
the knees straight (1 point). Approximately 12%–20% of a
rheumatology population has a Beighton score of 5–9. Far
fewer have a score ranging from 7–9.
A. A syndrome accompanies joint hypermobility, characterized in some patients by vague muscle aches, intermittent joint swellings without frank trauma or dislocation, and a typical fibromyalgia syndrome. Many patients
have mitral valve prolapse (MVP) and associated palpitations. Many patients without a frank syndrome suffer
from recurrent joint dislocations and in childhood have
had frequent visits to orthopedists. Neonatologists and
pediatricians encounter the severe genetic abnormalities causing joint hypermobility; the complete description of these is beyond the scope of this text.
Two phenotypic syndromes—Marfan’s syndrome
and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome—may present with joint
hypermobility and bear more extensive discussion
here. Both of these syndromes may have medical
emergencies requiring urgent management.
B. Marfan’s syndrome is characterized by elongated body
habitus, ectopia lentis (an upward displacement is characteristic), scoliosis, pes planus, high arched palate,
dural ectasia (especially of the lumbosacral spine), and
lung blebs. Vascular complications may be severe and
include aortic dissection and dilation (usually DeBakey
type I) and mitral valve prolapse and regurgitations.
The scoliosis can be severe and cause chronic pain. The
eye problems also can include retinal detachment.
Adults (and probably children) should receive longterm prophylactic beta blockade to try to prevent aortic
dilation and dissection. Counseling regarding the importance of low-impact physical activity is important,
and ongoing aortic echocardiography is warranted.
Particular problems may arise during pregnancy, and
female patients wishing to conceive need to be counseled both on the genetic inheritance of Marfan’s
syndrome and the increased risk to the mother. One
548

inherited disorder of connective tissue that can look
phenotypically similar to Marfan’s syndrome is homocystinuria. In that condition, the lens is dislocated in a
downward fashion. Measurement of serum and urine
homocysteine can confirm that diagnosis.
C. Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is a diverse grouping of abnormal collagen coding and transcription. An older classification (still used by many) defines up to 11 types. Many
of these present very early after birth. Of importance in
the differential diagnosis in adults is “type III,” which can
look like the hyperextensible joint syndrome. Unfortunately, there is no way currently to absolutely distinguish
Ehlers-Danlos type III from mere hyperextensible joint
syndrome. The distinction can become important because patients with type III Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
may have severe mitral valve prolapse and mitral regurgitation. Patients with type IV Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
have some joint hypermobility, but they are less hypermobile that the patients with type III. This phenotype is
important to recognize because they can have spontaneous rupture of the colon, uterus (especially in pregnancy), and vascular tree. Other types of Ehlers-Danlos
(especially I and II) have very thin skin that tends to scar
like thin cigarette paper, especially over the elbows and
knees. The skin is hyperdistensible and often nearly
translucent. Hypermobility in these types is usually
moderate.
Management of the hypermobility joint syndrome
involves splinting, physical therapy when appropriate,
and counseling regarding activities. Occasionally
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs are useful. If
the patient manifests fibromyalgia symptoms, then
the customary fibromyalgia treatments are used.
If Marfan’s syndrome or Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
is suspected, more rigorous investigations, especially
echocardiograms, are warranted. In the case of
Marfan’s syndrome, beta blockade for adults (as yet not
proved for children) is warranted. Detailed discussion
of the genetic inheritance, gene abnormalities, and
phenotypic syndromes for Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
and Marfan’s syndrome is available at the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man website (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/Omim/allresources.html).
References
El-Shahaly HA, el-Sherif AK. Is the benign hypermobility syndrome
benign? Clin Rheumatol 1991:10:302.
Goldman L, Ausiello DA. Cecil Textbook of Medicine, 22nd ed.
Philadelphia: Saunders, 2004:1637–1638.
Hakim AJ, Grahame R. Joint hypermobility syndrome: an update for
clinicians. Int J Adv Rheumatol 2003;1:131.

549
Patient with JOINT HYPERMOBILITY

History of ligamentous laxity or
recurrent dislocations

A Joint hypermobility
Beighton score "4
History of arthralgia or arthritis
Recurrent subluxations
Fibromyalgia symptoms
Possible MVP
Counsel
Treat fibromyalgia
Treat joint pain or
swelling with NSAIDs

B Marfan’s syndrome

Ectopia lentis
MVP or mitral
regurgitation
Scoliosis
Pneumothoraces
Pes planus
High arched palate
Arachnodactyly
Echocardiogram of heart
and aorta
If aorta !40 cm or very rapid
heart rate, consider surgery
All adults on beta blockers
Counsel regarding pregnancy
Counsel regarding physical activity

Measure serum/urine
homocysteine for
homocystinuria

C Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
Hypermobility
Thin skin
Scars over knees and elbows
Type III: very hypermobile
but skin not lax or thin
Type IV can have arterial and
organ ruptures

