KIDNEY STONES

Kidney stone disease is a common cause of morbidity in
the Western world. It affects 10%–20% of the population and leads to hospitalization in 1 in 1000 individuals
each year. More than 80% of kidney stones occur in white
males. White males have a lifetime risk of stone formation
approximating 20%. In contrast, the lifetime risk in white
females is much lower—approximately 5%–10%. There
is also clear racial preponderance of stone disease among
whites. Blacks have an incidence rate of stone disease that is
25% that of whites. The peak age of onset for kidney stone
formation is 20–30 years. However, there is a high recurrence rate—as high as 50% in 5 years among white males.
Of the four types of kidney stones (Table 1), the most
common are calcium-containing stones, which may be
calcium oxalate, calcium phosphate, or mixed calcium
oxalate/calcium phosphate stones. Magnesium ammonium phosphate stones, also known as struvite stones,
are observed mostly in association with an underlying

Table 1 Frequency of Different Stone Types
Type
Calcium
Calcium oxalate
Calcium phosphate
Mixed calcium oxalate/phosphate
Magnesium ammonium phosphate (struvite)
Uric acid
Cystine

%
70–80
70
!5
!5
10–20
5–10
!1

urease-splitting bacterial infection of the urinary tract
(e.g., Proteus spp). These stones often recur and are usually seen in patients with an associated anatomic abnormality. Approximately 5%–10% of kidney stones are
pure uric acid stones. These stones are usually observed
in the context of hyperuricemia among patients with a
gouty diathesis or a hematologic malignancy. Uric acid
stones have a high recurrence rate. Cystine stones are
rare. These stones are observed in patients with cystinuria, which results from an autosomal defect in the
transport of cystine, ornithine, lysine, and arginine in the
kidney and intestine.
The underlying risk factors for stone formation are incompletely understood. The most important risk factors are the
supersaturation of urine either by calcium oxalate and/or by
uric acid and the pH of the urine (Table 2). The absence or
Table 2 Risk Factors for Kidney Stone Formation
• Supersaturation of urine with solute (examples: hypercalciuria,
hyperoxaluria)
• Inadequate inhibition of stone formation (examples: hypocitraturia,
reduced levels of urinary osteopontin)
• Anatomic abnormalities (examples: pyelocalyceal diverticula,
ureteropelvic junction obstruction, horseshoe kidney)
• Diet (examples: high protein intake, excessive dietary sodium, low
urine volume implicated in stone-belt area such as southeastern
United States and Middle East)
• Changes in urinary pH (examples: urinary tract infection from
urease-splitting organism promotes alkaline urine)
• Certain medication use (examples: acetazolamide by increasing urine
pH and urine excretion of calcium; triamterene by crystallizing in
urine and forming nidus for stone formation)

(Continued on page 366)

364

365
reduced level of urinary inhibitors of stone formation, such
as citrate, also favors stone formation. The presence of a
urinary infection from a urease-splitting organism is a key
factor in struvite stone formation. The most common stones
are calcium oxalate stones (most often calcium oxalate monohydrate and dihydrate). Less than 5% of calcium-containing
stones are composed of pure calcium phosphate (apatite or
brushite, CaHPO4• 2H2O). The major cause of calcium
stone formation is excessive urinary excretion of calcium
(hypercalciuria). Hypercalciuria may occur with or without
hypercalcemia (Table 3). Hypercalcemia enhances the renal
filtered load of calcium and thus results in hypercalciuria.
The most common etiology of hypercalcemia is primary
hyperparathyroidism. Excessive parathyroid hormone (PTH)
secretion causes hypercalcemia by stimulating increased resorption of bone and stimulating increased renal synthesis
of dihydroxycholecalciferol (activated vitamin D), which, in
turn, stimulates intestinal absorption of calcium. Increased
resorption of calcium by the intestine, through a PTH and
vitamin D–independent pathway, has also been suggested,
but the mechanism remains obscure. Hypercalciuria without

Table 3 Diagnostic Workup of a Patient
with a Kidney Stone
1. Identify the number, size, and location of stones
a. Radiopaque stones can be seen by a plain abdominal x-ray
b. Radiolucent stones can be detected by CT
2. Analyze stone’s chemical composition
a. Strain urine (use a coffee filter for straining urine)
b. Send stone to an experienced laboratory for stone analysis
3. Perform a metabolic workup
a. Urinalysis and urine culture
b. Blood chemistries
c. 24-hour urine collection for volume, pH, calcium, phosphorus,
sodium, uric acid, oxalate, citrate, cystine, and creatinine; collect
at least two specimens to avoid variability

hypercalcemia is observed in 60% of calcium stone formers.
The primary abnormality appears to be impairment in renal
tubular resorption of calcium. Other less common etiologies
for calcium-stone formation include hyperuricosuria, which
occurs in about 10% of patients; hyperoxaluria; hypocitraturia; and medullary sponge kidney.
(Continued on page 366)

366
A. The clinical presentation varies depending on the location, size, and number of the stones. The majority of
kidney stones occur in the upper tracts. The most common presentation is renal colic—the sudden onset of
severe pain due to the presence of an obstructive renal
or ureteral stone. Renal colic is typically spasmodic in
character, lasting several minutes, typically localized to
the flank, and often radiating down to the groin. Nausea and vomiting frequently accompany renal colic.
Renal colic often occurs in the middle of the night or
early morning while the patient is sedentary, and its
severity has been described as akin to or worse than
childbirth. The severity of pain is a common cause of
patients coming to the emergency department. Larger
stones may present with painless obstruction or back
pain. Stones that reach the ureterovesical junction often present with renal colic accompanied by urgency
and frequency. Stones located in the calyces may be
completely asymptomatic. The general appearance of
a patient with renal colic is of someone writhing in
excruciating pain, acting restless, and pacing about
the room. The presence of fever usually heralds an
accompanying urinary tract infection. Otherwise the
physical examination may be completely negative.
B. The laboratory evaluation should be comprised of a
CBC; blood chemistries, including measurement of
BUN and creatinine; and a urinalysis (Table 3). The
presence of a urinary tract infection, particularly with
pyelonephritis, will be associated with a leukocytosis.
An elevated BUN and creatinine level suggest dehydration and/or the presence of an obstructing stone in
a patient with a single kidney or a bilateral obstructing
stones. The urine usually demonstrates hematuria and
pyuria. Assessment of urine pH is critical because an
acid urine with a radiolucent stone will suggest a uric
acid stone, whereas very alkaline urine (pH "8.0) suggests an infection with a urease-splitting organism
(e.g., Proteus, Pseudomonas, and Klebsiella spp.). The
initial radiologic workup should include a KUB

(kidney, ureter, and bladder) radiograph and an ultrasound or a noncontrast CT scan.
C. The management of kidney stones can be divided into
the management of the acute stone episode and, if the
stone is nonobstructing, management of the prevalent
stone medically and/or surgically, with an additional
focus on prevention of further stones. Management of
the acute stone episode rests on optimal pain control
using parenteral narcotic agents, hydration, and urologic consultation for potential removal of an obstructing stone. Medical management of a nonobstructing
stone requires increasing fluid intake to cause a urine
output of "2 L/day, modification in diet, treatment
targeted at changing urinary pH, and strategies to prevent further stones from forming. Surgical management depends on the size, location, and number of
stones. Surgical options include extracorporeal shock
wave lithotripsy (ESWL) and percutaneous or transurethral lithotripsy. General rules are that cystine
stones, calcium oxalate monohydrate stones, are generally poorly broken up by ESWL and percutaneous or
transurethral lithotripsy for removal are favored. However, other calcium oxalate stones, struvite and uric
acid stones, are generally amenable to ESWL and either percutaneous or transurethral routes for removal
depending on the size and location of the stones.
References
Asplin JR. Evaluation of the kidney stone patient. Semin Nephrol
2008;28(2):99–110.
Miller NL, Lingeman JE. Management of kidney stones. BMJ
2007;334(7591):468–472.
Reynolds TM. ACP Best Practice No 181: Chemical pathology clinical
investigation and management of nephrolithiasis. J Clin Pathol
2005;58(2):134–140.
Sakhaee K. Recent advances in the pathophysiology of nephrolithiasis.
Kidney Int 2009;75(6):585–595. Epub 2008 Dec 10.
Unwin RJ, Capasso G, Robertson WG, Choong S. A guide to renal stone
disease. Practitioner 2005;249(1666):18, 20, 24 passim.
Worcester EM, Coe FL. Nephrolithiasis. Prim Care 2008;35(2):369–391,
vii.

367
Patient with KIDNEY STONES

A Initial visit with abdominal
pain or renal colic

Pain control

B CBC

Urinalysis and culture
chemistry panel
Renal ultrasound or noncontrast
helical CT scan (ultrasound if
patient is pregnant)

C Stone confirmed

Ureteral stone
!5 mm

Renal or ureteral
stone "5 mm

Conservative
management

Stone fails to
pass within
2–4 wk

Stone passes

No stone

Patient also has
urosepsis, anuria, or
renal failure

Urology referral
Urgent management if
septic or has renal
failure
Surgical options:
ESWL
Ureteroscopy
Ureterorenoscopy
Percutaneous
nephrolithotomy

Nephrology referral

