A. Knee pain of intraarticular origin is suggested by joint effusion, pain with either active or passive motion, tenderness at the joint line, or evidence of compromise of the anterior or posterior cruciate ligament by positive anterior or posterior drawer test, respectively. Effusion is much more prominent, and much more likely to be tender, in inflammatory arthritis than in osteoarthritis and mechanical causes. Meniscal tears often produce locking and instability, and examination can reveal joint line tenderness (medial more often than lateral) and/or a positive McMurray's test (pain and palpable click at medial joint line during knee flexion and extension with ankle rotated laterally) or Apley's test (pain with compression of knee by pressing down on foot when patient is prone with affected knee bent at 90-degree angle). Tibial plateau fracture occurs in the setting of trauma, which can be minor in the setting of osteoporosis; point tenderness is a feature but can be difficult to distinguish from tenderness in other structures. Chondromalacia patella, a softening of articular cartilage, is a common condition presenting as a “patellofemoral syndrome” of anterior knee pain particularly with climbing and descending stairs. Recurrent hemarthrosis is a classic finding of hemophilia, but most cases currently are monophasic and associated with anticoagulation and/or trauma.
B. Acute knee pain associated with effusion should be evaluated by aspiration, with the fluid evaluated by Gram stain, culture, WBC count and differential, and examination for crystals. A large effusion in the setting of chronic knee pain of uncertain origin should also be aspirated. Knee effusion in the setting of a high suspicion for chronic degenerative disease or traumatic internal disruption does not require aspiration.
C. Chronic or acute articular knee pain generally merits radiography, using anteroposterior (AP), lateral, and “sunrise” (tangent to the patella) views. To evaluate for joint space narrowing, a weight-bearing AP view should be obtained. Avascular necrosis and osteomyelitis are often not apparent on plain radiography for about 6 weeks after onset.
D. MRI is the technique of choice to diagnose meniscal tear, anterior or posterior cruciate ligament tear, avascular necrosis, osteomyelitis, and most tumors. It also shows inflammation of the synovium (synovitis) well, although physical examination and laboratory workup usually make documentation of synovitis by MRI unnecessary. Bone scan is sensitive for infection, avascular necrosis, and most tumors but is also positive in osteoarthritis, so it is useful only when that is unlikely to be superimposed.
E. Extraarticular knee pain is revealed by the physical examination. Prepatellar bursitis features pain and tenderness of the anterior knee, often a well-defined area of redness and swelling anterior to and somewhat distal to the patella and pain with knee flexion but none with extension. Inflammation of the anserine bursa is apparent with focal tenderness at the medial aspect of the proximal tibia and pain with resisted knee flexion. Pain that is much greater with active than passive motion raises suspicion for tendonitis. Patellar tendonitis features pain with resisted knee extension and often tenderness between the patella and the tibia; quadriceps tendonitis is less common and features pain and tenderness above the patella with analogous maneuvers. Tendonitis of the hip adductors features medial pain elicited by resisted adduction of the leg. Tendonitis of the iliotibial band, analogously, features lateral pain elicited by resisted abduction. Pain in the lateral and medial collateral ligaments is elicited by stressing the ligaments with varus (holding the knee steady and moving the ankle medially) or valgus (holding the knee steady and moving the ankle laterally) movement, respectively. The examiner may also note ligamentous laxity with such maneuvers or focal tenderness over the affected ligament.

