LATE ISSUES FOR PATIENTS WHO SURVIVE THE INITIAL DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT OF CANCER


Although modern therapy has produced a significant improvement in the rate of control and cure of cancer, the
devastation of the disease and its treatment have lasting
effects on both patients and family. Successful treatment of
patients with cancer requires not only technical expertise
in the initial phase of diagnosis and management, but also
compassion and commitment in the long term to aid the
patient and his or her family in navigating the many complex issues and challenges they will face for years to come.
Following initial cancer therapy, patients and their families will face ongoing needs and issues in five main areas:
the potential for relapse of the initial cancer, the physical
and physiologic effects of the cancer and its treatment
both short and long term, the psychological and emotional
sequelae of the disease itself and its treatment, the specific
potential for shared genetic risk for cancer development in
blood relatives, and the potential for the late development
of new cancers, including those that may themselves be a
consequence of initial therapy.
Relapse of the primary cancer will be a major concern for
patients in the years following initial diagnosis and treatment. A periodic history and physical examination are the
key focuses of follow-up and should be coordinated with a
cancer specialist, at least during the early phase. In selected
malignancies, focused radiologic or laboratory studies will
be important, such as mammograms in the follow-up of
breast cancer and serial monitoring of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) after treatment for prostate cancer, but for most
malignancies repetitive performance of “surveillance” blood
and radiologic studies has little additional impact on survival
and quality of life while adding significantly to expense. In

286

contrast, prompt and rigorous laboratory and radiologic
evaluation of new symptoms or physical findings is key to
successful early intervention for possible relapse. For most
malignancies, patients should be followed on an interval of
every 3 months for 2–3 years after completion of initial successful treatment for cancer. The interval for follow-up can
be lengthened thereafter if the patient remains stable. Specific timelines for follow-up and selected ancillary studies
that have proved valuable are described for individual cancer diagnoses in the guidelines published by the National
Comprehensive Cancer Network (www.nccn.org).
Even when successful, cancer treatment can leave devastating scars and result in significant short- and long-term
dysfunction. Radical surgical procedures result in obvious
physical effects; radical radiation can produce equally significant scarring in the short term and later endocrine or
neurologic dysfunction, accelerated atherosclerosis, or secondary malignancies, as discussed later. Chemotherapy
may produce a wide spectrum or early and late organ
dysfunction, including immune dysregulation, premature
menopause, cardiac dysfunction, pulmonary fibrosis,
alterations of renal or hepatic function, neuropathy, or skin
pigmentation changes depending on the agents used and
dose and duration of therapy. In pediatric populations,
intensive cancer therapy may have significant effects on
subsequent growth and development.
Interrelated with but sometimes independent of the
physical and physiologic effects of cancer therapy, the psychological and emotional consequences are obvious but
often persistent well beyond apparently successful initial
therapy. Changes in body image, fear of disease relapse,

287
altered interpersonal relationships, disruption of education
or career paths, and ongoing alteration of physical capacity
may all dramatically and permanently affect cancer survivors. Family members may be equally or even more significantly affected. Although the acute phase of cancer
treatment typically includes an extensive framework for
psychological and emotional support and therapy, there
may be barriers to access to such support following completion of the initial phase of therapy, particularly for
patients who find it difficult to return to the setting that
reminds them of the trauma of their initial care.
With the characterization of cancer as a disease resulting
from alteration of normal genetic programs, it is now possible to explain the clustering of cancers in certain families
on the basis of a shared germline mutation placing those
families at higher risk. Beyond the many issues described
previously that patients must face, they are increasingly
aware of and concerned about the potential that they may
have transmitted a higher risk for cancer to their children
or that they share that risk with other family members. A
family cancer syndrome should be particularly suspected
when cancer appears in multiple family members or affects
particularly young individuals (those !40 years of age).
Specific algorithms for genetic counseling, testing, and
preemptive intervention have been developed for families
with premature or clusters of breast, colon, and ovarian
cancer but should be pursued in conjunction with an established genetics clinic.
Cancer survivors are at risk not only for the relapse of
their primary malignancy but also of additional and independent malignancies in the years following their diagnosis.
The same risk factors that led to the first cancer leave

patients at risk for the development of independent cancers
of the same organ later, particularly for breast, lung, and
head and neck malignancies, with continued tobacco
exposure particularly exacerbating that risk in the latter
two. Chemotherapy and radiation may also produce secondary malignancies that develop because of the treatment
itself. Genetic damage induced by irradiation or by certain
classes of chemotherapeutic agents sets into motion a new
sequence of cellular degeneration and transformation
producing acute leukemia, non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, and
virtually the entire spectrum of solid malignancies complicating the late course of cancer treatment. Certain patients,
particularly those with Hodgkin’s and non-Hodgkin’s
lymphoma, acute leukemia, retinoblastoma, Wilms’ tumor,
soft-tissue sarcoma, and testicular malignancies, seem to be
at particular risk.
The approach to cancer survivors should be grounded on
three important axes: a specific plan for short- and longterm follow-up developed by and usually including the initial oncologic care team to particularly define needed studies and intervals of care; rigorous health maintenance,
focusing especially on atherosclerosis risk reduction and
general established cancer monitoring such as mammography, colonoscopy, Pap tests, and periodic skin examinations;
and access to psychological and emotional counseling and
support services. Pediatric cancer survivors should additionally have access to multidisciplinary health care resources
that can appropriately respond to and support these patients
and their families as they face the unique issues and challenges of changes in subsequent growth and development
caused by their treatment.
(Continued on page 288)

288
A. In the initial discussions of diagnosis and treatment,
potential late consequences of treatment choices
should be reviewed and evaluated in the context of
preexisting medical conditions. Particular attention
should be given to reproductive issues, and patients
should be offered the possibility of banking sperm or
embryos if appropriate and feasible.
B. As primary cancer therapy is completed, a specific follow-up plan designed based on the initial diagnosis and
treatment should be developed in collaboration between the oncology and primary care teams. Particular
follow-up plans appropriate to specific diagnoses can
be reviewed at www.nccn.org. Patients and families
should be counseled as to signs or symptoms they
should monitor for and report to the care team and
issues they may need to anticipate accommodating in
their subsequent life and lifestyle choices.
C. Particular design of follow-up must include not only
appropriate monitoring for relapse of the primary
malignancy but also new cancers in the same organ
system and specific secondary malignancies for which
the patient may be at risk based on primary therapy.
This will include a periodic history and physical
examination, with particular attention to a good
cancer detection examination in all patients; periodic
mammograms and Pap tests in essentially all female
patients; and studies in selected patients at higher
risk, such as CBC to monitor for secondary myelodysplasia or leukemia, chest x-ray to monitor for lung
malignancies in patients following chest irradiation,
and the like.
D. Any new signs or symptoms should be promptly and
thoroughly evaluated as a possible indication of relapsed or new malignancy. This evaluation should be
conducted in conjunction with the oncology care
team.
E. Monitoring should include particular attention toward organs at high risk for short- and long-term
dysfunction following primary therapy coupled with
appropriate risk-reduction strategies. This includes
monitoring thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) at
least annually in patients following radiotherapy to
the neck, reproductive counseling and evaluation,
and focused cardiovascular monitoring in patients

F.

G.

H.
I.

receiving chest irradiation or previous potentially
cardiotoxic chemotherapy.
Genetic counseling and potential follow-up testing and
intervention should be offered to selected patients and
their families with a high-risk context and breast,
colon, or ovarian malignancies. Families at high risk
include those in which multiple malignancies present
in one individual or groups of primary relatives, those
in which cancer presents at an unusually early age
(!40 years old), or those of Ashkenazi Jewish
descent in which breast and ovarian cancer occurs.
Unusual and extensive clusters of any type of cancer in
a single family warrant potential investigation. Approaches are described at www.nccn.org but should be
pursued in collaboration with an established genetics
clinic.
All cancer survivors should resume regular health
maintenance procedures as appropriate for age, gender, and general medical history, but this should include particularly vigorous evaluation of and action
directed toward cardiovascular risk factors, smoking
cessation counseling and intervention, and institution
of general positive health habits.
Patients and families may need lifelong access to psychosocial counseling and support services.
Pediatric cancer survivors and their families may need
access to experienced multidisciplinary clinics and
resources to focus on the special and profound issues
of growth and development alterations induced by
their disease and its therapy and the lasting or
late-presenting psychosocial consequences of that
treatment.

References
Greene MH, Wilson J. Second cancer following lymphatic and hematopoietic cancers in Connecticut, 1935–1982. Natl Cancer Inst Monograph
1985;68:191.
National Comprehensive Cancer Network. www.nccn.org, 2006.
Swinnen LJ. Treatment of organ transplant-related lymphoma. Hematol
Oncol Clin North Am 1997;11:963.
Van Leeuwen FE, Travis LB. Second cancers. In DeVita VT, Hellman S,
Rosenberg SA, eds. Cancer: Principles and Practice of Oncology, 7th
ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 2005.
Witherspoon RP, Fisher LD, Schoch G, et al. Secondary cancers after
bone marrow transplantation for leukemia or aplastic anemia. N Engl
J Med 1989;321:784.

289
SECONDARY MALIGNANCIES in Patients PREVIOUSLY TREATED FOR CANCER

A Counseling at diagnosis,
including fertility options

B At completion of initial therapy,

additional counseling and design
of follow-up scheme

C Monitor for late malignancies, including

relapse of primary cancer, additional cancers
of same organ, secondary malignancies due
to treatment: mammograms, Pap smear, skin
examination, and diagnosis-specific follow-up

D Prompt evaluation of

new signs or symptoms

E Monitor and treat organ dysfunction caused
by therapy: TSH if radiation, reproductive
counseling, cardiovascular health issues

F Genetic counseling, testing, and

intervention in appropriate contexts

G Ongoing rigorous health maintenance

with particular attention to cardiovascular
health, general health habits, smoking
cessation

H Continued access to appropriate
psychosocial support

I Multidisciplinary clinic access for

pediatric patients to follow growth
and developmental issues

