LEG ULCER

A. The cause of a leg ulcer usually can be determined by
history and physical examination alone. It is therefore
important to ask the patient about trauma and any history of diseases such as coronary artery disease, deep
venous thrombosis, and diabetes mellitus. Inquire
about symptoms of vasculitis, chronic inflammatory
disorders, and neoplasms. The physical examination
should focus on evidence of edema, varicosities, arterial insufficiency, neuropathy, and infection.
B. Arterial ulcers account for 5% of all leg ulcers. They
result from impairment of blood flow and have multiple causes, including emboli, thrombi, arteriosclerosis,
Buerger’s disease, hypertension, vasospasm, vasculitis,
and hematologic disorders. Patients complain of pain
at rest that is exacerbated with leg elevation and relieved with dependency. The ulcers are characterized
by a pale or eschar-covered base with minimal granulation tissue, usually occurring on the distal foot. Other
important signs of arterial involvement are coolness of
the extremities, decreased pulses and slow capillary
refill, a palpable or audible bruit over the femoral artery, and decreased hair on the distal legs. If arterial
pulses are not palpable, use a Doppler flowmeter to
hear the pulsations over the dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial arteries and calculate the ankle/brachial index (ABI) of systolic pressure. If the index is !0.7,
moderate to severe disease is present and arteriography should be considered.
C. Chronic venous insufficiency accounts for about 90% of
all leg ulcers. Venous stasis results from a dysfunction of
venous outflow, most commonly caused by defective
valves (usually secondary to deep venous thromboses or
a congenital defect). Patients have edema and, in contrast to those with arterial disease, have relatively little
pain. On physical examination an ulcer with exudate
and granulation tissue often is seen over the medial
malleolus. Varicosities, brown hemosiderin pigment,
and stasis dermatitis support the diagnosis.
D. In the presence of normal vasculature and no obvious
etiology, consider pyoderma gangrenosum (PG, which

116

E.

F.

G.

H.

has a violaceous border that is undermined), inflammatory bowel disease, hematologic malignancies, or other
systemic disease.
Neurotrophic ulcers are caused by the repeated trauma
or pressure on weight-bearing areas where there is
impaired cutaneous sensation. Diabetes mellitus accounts for most of these ulcers, but other causes include other forms of vascular disease (polyarteritis
nodosa), lead/arsenic polyneuropathies, alcoholic polyneuropathy, sarcoidosis, leprosy, and syphilis.
Infection is another etiologic factor in leg ulcers. It
occurs most commonly after primary inoculation of a
pathogen, although dissemination from a primary focus elsewhere also is possible. Lesions are inflamed
and purulent and may have draining sinuses. Perform
a biopsy at the ulcer margin and send the tissue to be
cultured for bacterial, fungal, mycobacterial, and viral
pathogens, as well as for routine histology.
Lack of response of an ulcer to therapy or rapid growth of
a lesion that was previously stable should lead one to suspect neoplasm. An elevated ulcer edge with central crust
or granulation tissue is characteristic of many tumors.
A biopsy of the ulcer margin should be performed.
Traumatic ulcers are diagnosed by history. Some patients with self-induced disease may be unwilling to
divulge the cause and may, in fact, be inappropriately
unconcerned. These ulcers are characterized by bizarre
shapes that have minimal surrounding erythema.

References
Bolognia J, Jorizza J, Rapine R. Dermatology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier, 2007.
Burton CS III. Treatment of leg ulcers. Dermatol Clin 1993;11:315.
Douglas WS, Simpson NB. Guidelines for the management of chronic
venous leg ulceration. Br J Dermatol 1995;132:446.
Krull EA. Chronic cutaneous ulcerations and impaired healing in the human skin. J Am Acad Dermatol 1995;12:394.
Phillips TJ, Dover JS. Leg ulcers. J Am Acad Dermatol 1991;25:965.
Wolff K, Goldsmith LA, Katz SI, et al: Fitzpatrick’s Dermatology in General Medicine, 7th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2007.

117
Patient with LEG ULCER

A History

Physical examination

B Arterial ulcer

C Venous ulcer

Doppler Ultrasound
ABI
Arteriography
"
Skin Biopsy

E Neurotrophic ulcer

Consider:
Diabetes mellitus
Exogenous neurotoxins
Alcoholism
Sarcoidosis
Leprosy
Syphilis

No apparent
etiology

Doppler Ultrasound
Plethysmography
Duplex Ultrasound
Venography

Consider:
Emboli/thrombi
Arteriosclerosis obliterans
Thromboangiitis obliterans
Hypertensive leg ulcer
Raynaud’s disease/
livedo reticularis
Vasculitis
Sickle cell disease

Decreased cutaneous sensation

D Normal vasculature

Chronic edema
Varicosities
Pigment changes

History of rest pain
Cool distal extremity

Consider:
Venous insufficiency
Venous occlusion
Thrombophlebitis

Erythema
Purulent exudate

Chronic ulceration
Elevated edges

Skin Biopsy
Culture of Exudate

Skin Biopsy

F Infectious ulcer
Consider:
Bacterial
Fungal
Mycobacterial
Treponemal
Viral
Parasitic

G Neoplastic ulcer
Consider:
Squamous cell carcinoma
Basal cell carcinoma
Sarcoma
Lymphoma
Metastasis

Consider:
Pyoderma
gangrenosum
Inflammatory
bowel disease
Hematologic
malignancy
Other systemic
disease

History of trauma

H Traumatic ulcer

Consider:
Burn/heat
Frostbite
Pressure
Postradiation
Insect bite
Self-induced/factitial

