A. Contraindications to long-term anticoagulant therapy include those listed for acute anticoagulation (p 686); in addition, long-term anticoagulant therapy is contraindicated in those patients who are severely debilitated and malnourished, those who fall or undergo significant trauma, those with alcoholism, and those who are unlikely to understand or comply with therapy. As always, the risk-benefit ratio must be considered. Pregnancy is an absolute contraindication to warfarin. Women of childbearing age who receive warfarin must be using an effective contraceptive method.
B. Patients with recurrent thromboembolism on warfarin therapy should first be evaluated for compliance and adequacy of anticoagulation. If low-intensity anticoagulation was used, consider high-intensity therapy. Alternatively, consider subcutaneous low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) therapy. In patients with frequent recurrences of thromboembolism, consider the presence of malignancy or other hypercoagulable state (activated protein C deficiency, prothrombin mutation, etc.).
C. The average dose of warfarin required to achieve the target INR in adult patients is 5 mg. However, individual patient dose requirements vary widely, and there is no objective method that allows accurate prediction of the therapeutic dose in a given patient. The initial dose should be the expected therapeutic maintenance dose. Giving an initial loading dose is not rational given the pharmacology of warfarin and will not cause a more rapid achievement of therapeutic levels of anticoagulation. An initial 10-mg regimen can be useful in predicting subsequent dose requirements but should be administered only in the context of a formal dosing nomogram. Elderly patients usually require lower dosages of warfarin.
D. The level of anticoagulation during warfarin therapy is determined by the INR. This calculated value corrects for the widely varying thromboplastin reagents used to determine the prothrombin time (PT). Warfarin therapy cannot be safely or effectively managed without use of the INR. For most clinical indications, the target INR is 2.5 (range 2-3). For patients with most types of mechanical prosthetic heart valves or those who failed lower-intensity anticoagulation, a target INR of 3 (range 2.5-3.5) is desired. These INR ranges serve as clinical guidelines, not absolute values. The target INR for a specific patient is based on the risk of bleeding, age, and concomitant drug therapy.
E. Warfarin therapy must be closely monitored. Frequent monitoring is needed as therapy is titrated; less frequent visits are needed as the patient becomes stable. Initially, outpatients should be evaluated at weeks 1, 2, and 4. If the INR remains in the target range, the patient may be monitored every 4-8 weeks. Studies have shown that outcomes are consistently improved if patients are monitored by an anticoagulation clinic. All patients who are given warfarin must receive education and counseling regarding the underlying thromboembolic disorder, how to take the warfarin, possible side effects, and significant drug interactions. This information must be reviewed at each patient encounter.
F. If the INR is not in the target range, evaluate the patient for noncompliance, drug interactions, or a change in cardiac or hepatic function. Many drugs, including over-the-counter products, vitamins, and herbal/alternative agents, have significant interactions with warfarin. Any new drug should be initiated with great caution. If a correctable factor is identified and removed, the patient may continue taking the previous warfarin dose. In a patient who was previously stable with a minor fluctuation in INR and no change in clinical status, the warfarin dose may be continued and the INR should be rechecked in 1 week. Note that large changes in dose are not recommended and the change in INR will not be proportional to the change in dose. Patients with a very high INR (e.g., >6–10) should be assessed for bleeding complications. In the absence of bleeding, holding the warfarin dose may be the best approach. The INR can be reduced quickly by administering vitamin K 2.5 mg PO or 0.5–1 mg SC without causing warfarin resistance. Larger doses of vitamin K will cause prolonged resistance to subsequent warfarin therapy and should be avoided.
G. The duration of anticoagulant therapy is determined by the underlying disease and risk of recurrent thromboembolism. For patients with a first deep venous thrombosis (DVT) or pulmonary embolism (PE), 3–6 months of therapy may be adequate, especially if an underlying cause can be identified and removed. However, in patients with recurrent DVT or PE, atrial fibrillation with embolism or mechanical valves will require long-term therapy.
H. Bleeding complications may occur with a therapeutic or elevated INR. The risk of future anticoagulation must be weighed against the risk of future bleeding episodes. The management of warfarin-associated bleeding generally consists of holding the drug and administering vitamin K, fresh frozen plasma, or both. Full reversal of anticoagulation may not be desired in patients with mechanical heart valves. Administration of large doses of vitamin K (>5 mg SC/IV) will cause resistance to future warfarin therapy for several weeks. In patients who develop GI bleeding or hematuria with a therapeutic INR, a GI or urinary tract lesion may be present.

