LOW BONE DENSITY

Low bone density is diagnosed by a bone mineral density
(BMD) test and may be caused by osteoporosis (decreased
bone mass with disrupted architecture), osteomalacia (disordered bone mineralization), or osteitis fibrosa cystica
(characterized by marrow fibrosis).
A. In addition to a careful history and physical examination to identify potential underlying causes for low bone
density, some experts also recommend a CBC, urinary
calcium excretion, thyroid function, and serum chemistries (calcium, phosphorus, total protein, liver enzymes,
alkaline phosphatase, creatinine, and electrolytes). If
the history or evaluation suggests secondary causes, additional tests for serum 25-OH vitamin D, parathyroid
hormone (PTH), ESR, and serum and urine protein
electrophoresis can be considered.
B. In primary osteoporosis, laboratory study results should
be normal. Abnormal study results may suggest an associated disorder.
The most common laboratory abnormalities in osteomalacia are hypophosphatemia and elevated serum
alkaline phosphatase. A low alkaline phosphatase
suggests hypophosphatasia. Hypophosphatemia with
hypocalcemia usually indicates vitamin D deficiency,
whereas isolated hypophosphatemia is most consistent
with a renal tubular phosphate-wasting syndrome.
Primary hyperparathyroidism is diagnosed by a combination of hypercalcemia and an inappropriately
elevated serum PTH. Secondary hyperparathyroidism
as a result of renal failure will show a decreased serum
calcium, increased serum phosphate, and increased
serum PTH.
C. Vertebral fracture is the most common clinical presentation of osteoporosis. Primary osteoporosis is defined
as the progressive loss of bone increasing with age.

540

D. Secondary osteoporosis can result from underlying
medical conditions, including malabsorption; hypogonadism; hyperthyroidism; multiple myeloma; and the
administration of certain medications, especially corticosteroids. Of the secondary causes, vitamin D deficiency and glucocorticoid use are among the most
common.
E. The major symptom of osteomalacia is diffuse, dull,
aching skeletal pain that is worsened by activity. Muscle weakness, usually involving the proximal musculature, is often present. Vitamin D deficiency accounts
for the majority of cases of osteomalacia and can be
caused by dietary deficiency or malabsorption resulting from GI disorders. Hypophosphatemia resulting
from renal wasting is another important cause and can
result from vitamin D deficiency, from primary renal
tubular wasting, or as part of Fanconi’s syndrome (e.g.,
as may be seen in multiple myeloma). Chronic renal
failure can lead to decreased vitamin D metabolism
and secondary hyperparathyroidism and can contribute to osteomalacia. Disorders of bone matrix such as
hypophosphatasia, fibrogenesis imperfecta, and axial
osteomalacia are rare causes of osteomalacia.
F. Osteitis fibrosa cystica is caused by hyperparathyroidism
and is now rare. Many patients with hyperparathyroidism,
however, do have low bone mineral density.

References
Crandall C. Laboratory workup for osteoporosis: which tests are most
cost-effective? Postgrad Med 2003;114(3):35–38.
Favus MJ. Editorial: postmenopausal osteoporosis and the detection of
so-called secondary causes of low bone density. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 2005;90(6):3800.
Tuck SP, Francis RM. Osteoporosis. Postgrad Med J 2002;78:526–532.

541
Patient with LOW BONE DENSITY

A History and

physical examination

B Laboratory tests

D Secondary osteoporosis:
C Primary osteoporosis:

No evidence of
underlying conditions
on history, physical
examination, or
laboratory evaluation

Medications
Endocrine disorders
GI disorders
Hematologic disorders
Inflammatory diseases

F Hyperparathyroidism:
E Osteomalacia:

phosphate, alkaline
phosphatase: most
common
alkaline phosphatase:
hypophosphatasia
phosphate, calcium:
vitamin D deficiency
Isolated phosphate:
renal wasting

Primary hyperparathyroidism —
Ca, PTH
Secondary hyperparathyroidism —
Ca, phosphate, PTH

