Most people will experience at least one episode of low back pain during their adult lifetime. Most of these are of short duration, lasting from days to a few weeks, and resolve with little if any therapeutic intervention. The challenge to the clinician is to identify those patients who may benefit from diagnostic interventions to further evaluate their pain.

A. When assessing the patient, the following questions should be considered.
Where does it hurt? Back pain is usually described as a dull steady ache over the lower lumbar spine that sometimes may radiate toward the buttocks. Patients usually do not complain of localized severe point tenderness except when there may be a fracture. Pain radiating down a leg may suggest nerve impingement from either disk herniation in a younger patient or osteophyte formation in an older individual.
When does it hurt? In patients with disk-related back pain, symptoms are often made worse by sitting or standing for extended periods. Coughing or sneezing may aggravate these symptoms, which are generally related to a disk herniation that is impinging on a nerve root. In contrast, lying flat often alleviates this pain.
In patients with lumbar spinal stenosis, forward flexion of the back may “open up” the narrowed spinal canal foraminal spaces and improve the pain symptoms. Patients also describe relief when leaning forward to push a shopping cart ("shopping cart sign"). These patients note worsening of symptoms when standing for prolonged periods.
How does activity affect the pain? Generally, rest improves back pain symptoms, at least in the short term. This may be true for back pain from disk herniations or spinal stenosis from osteoarthritis. Symptoms are minimal on arising and worsen with activity. In contrast, patients with an inflammatory spondyloarthropathy (e.g., ankylosing spondylitis, psoriatic arthritis, or inflammatory bowel disease) note more stiffness and worsening of symptoms following periods of prolonged inactivity. These patients may also have nighttime symptoms and feel worse in the morning on arising.
Does the pain radiate? Radiation of pain down one leg (sciatica) may result from disk herniation or impingement caused by an osteophyte or a combination of both. The patient may describe pure leg pain without back pain, although most patients complain of both. Pain or dysesthesias in the perineum can result from cauda equina syndrome. These patients need to be identified promptly because surgical referral is urgently required.
What relieves the pain? By the time of their visit, patients may have self-treated with low doses of NSAIDs or acetaminophen. If there is benefit noted with these drugs, this information could be helpful in developing a management strategy for control of pain. Application of heat or cold to the back may provide transient relief but does not aid in establishing a diagnosis.
B. Inspection of spine posture may demonstrate scoliosis or asymmetry. Forward flexion of the spine should be assessed for muscle spasm and ease of flexibility. Schober's test is a measure of lumbar flexibility used to evaluate patients with a spondyloarthropathy. A segment of the lumbar spine measuring 10 cm when standing should expand to about 15 cm or more when fully flexed. In cases of vertebral compression fracture, there may be localized tenderness on palpation. Persons with spinal stenosis generally have more pain with back extension rather than forward flexion. A straight leg raise (SLR) test should be performed with the patient supine and the uninvolved knee bent to 45 degrees and resting on the table. The examiner should hold the involved leg straight, cup the heel with the other hand, and gradually raise the leg. With a disk herniation impinging on a nerve root, the straight leg raise will stretch these roots and pain may radiate below the tested knee. Note that the SLR test is positive if the distal leg pain occurs with leg elevation <60 degrees.
When pain radiates down the nontested leg (crossed SLR) these findings are even more specific than pain going down the ipsilateral leg. Note that the SLR is more reliable in younger patients and loses diagnostic value in older patients. A detailed sensory and motor examination and assessment of deep tendon reflexes should be performed to identify specific dermatome involvement. This is very helpful when trying to ascertain the relevance of imaging findings noted on CT or MRI.
The most common areas for disk herniation and lumbar stenosis are at L4-L5 and L5-S1. At L4-L5 one might see loss of strength in the extensor hallucis longis and a dysesthesia over the big toe and medial foot. With L5-S1 disease, the toe flexors and ankle jerk are reduced and there are dysesthesia over the fifth toe and lateral foot. In the rare cauda equina syndrome, the S2, S3, and S4 roots may be involved and patients have bowel and bladder dysfunction with dysesthesia over the perineum.
C. Current guidelines recommend obtaining plain radiographs in patients with fever, unexplained weight loss, neurologic deficits, IV drug abuse, or age >50 years. Radiographs are very useful in detecting structural abnormalities such as spondylolisthesis and scoliosis but are not sensitive for detecting cancer or infection. Imaging with CT or MRI should be reserved for the patient for whom there is a strong clinical suspicion of an infection, cancer, or presence of a persistent neurologic deficit. Imaging could be useful in determining whether targeted epidural injection of corticosteroid or surgical referral is appropriate.
Imaging needs to be interpreted carefully because a high percentage of patients with or without back pain symptoms will have abnormalities such as disk degeneration or bulging or protruding disks or even central or lateral canal stenosis. For example, it is highly unlikely that anyone >50 years will have a “normal” CT or MRI of the spine. Imaging is most useful when the clinical findings on physical examination correlate in a neuroanatomic fashion with the findings on MRI or CT. Radiologic findings that do not match the clinical examination should raise strong doubts about the value of MRI or CT in that particular patient.
D. Electromyography (EMG) is generally of limited value. CBC and ESR may be useful in the evaluation of patients suspected of having systemic disease such as infection, malignancy, or spondyloarthropathy.

