LYMPHADENOPATHY

More than 500 lymph nodes in the human body may
become enlarged in response to numerous stimuli: (1)
infection (bacterial, viral, parasitic, spirochetal, chlamydial,
mycobacterial, or fungal), (2) drug reactions (phenytoin, serum sickness), (3) malignancy (head and neck, GI, breast,
rectal, lymphoma), and (4) miscellaneous conditions (sarcoidosis, systemic lupus erythematosus).
A. New-onset lymphadenopathy !7 days’ duration is
unlikely to be malignant.
B. Recurrent or long-term ("7–14 days) lymphadenopathy (unilateral or bilateral) requires a full workup.
Most experienced clinicians see the patient again
in 2–4 weeks to determine whether the node is
increasing before embarking on a full workup. The
associated symptoms of fever, weight loss, or night
sweats suggest malignancy (lymphoma B symptoms)
or infection. Regional symptoms such as chest
tightness, dysphagia, shortness of breath, and/or
facial swelling suggest mediastinal disease and require a CT scan of the chest. Complaints of fullness
in the abdomen, early satiety, and pain radiating to
the shoulders or back necessitate abdominal CT to
rule out pancreatic, renal, or other intraperitoneal
lesions. Unilateral leg swelling (after deep vein
thrombosis is ruled out) may require pelvic CT to
rule out regional lymphadenopathy causing extrinsic compression.
C. Serologic studies and blood cultures help differentiate
among infections, collagen vascular disease, and malignancy. Among the most common infectious causes
are infectious mononucleosis, toxoplasmosis, syphilis, Epstein-Barr virus, HIV, and cytomegalovirus.
If the history is suspicious and the patient is or was
living in an endemic area, these causes must be
ruled out.
D. Lymph node enlargement in the head and neck area
requires a careful ear, neck, and throat (ENT) evaluation, including biopsy of suspicious lesions; if ENT
findings are normal, the patient may need to undergo
a triple endoscopy procedure with evaluation of nasal,
bronchial, and esophageal passages. Consider fine
needle biopsy of the lymph node only if endoscopic
findings are normal.

268

E. The supraclavicular area often is affected by breast
cancer, lymphomas (Hodgkin’s and non-Hodgkin’s),
and metastases from the lung and GI tract (esophagus,
stomach, pancreas). Supraclavicular nodes are easily
biopsied and are highly diagnostic.
F. Enlarged axillary lymph nodes often are a sign of
breast or lung cancer. They also are often affected by
lymphoma and may be biopsied to obtain a diagnosis if
the primary source cannot be found.
G. When inguinal nodes are enlarged, physical examination
should focus on the anorectal region, perineum, vulva,
penis, and scrotum. Perform sigmoidoscopy to rule out
rectal or anal carcinoma; evaluate the genitourinary
system by urinalysis. Pelvic CT may provide useful
information. If CT findings are normal, proceed
with biopsy. Tumor markers carcinoembryonic antigen
(CEA), prostate-specific antigen (PSA), and the
murine monoclonal antibody OC125 also may provide
guidance toward a diagnosis.
H. For a patient with generalized lymphadenopathy but no
other signs or symptoms and no other organ involvement, consider biopsy of the most accessible region (not
necessarily the largest). The diagnostic yield is better
with supraclavicular, axillary, or inguinal nodes (in
descending order). A key feature of these biopsies is the
need for adequate amounts of tissue with the specimen
sectioned to allow for light microscopy, fresh frozen
tissue for markers, and a portion in glutaraldehyde for
electron microscopy. Patients with nondiagnostic biopsies require close follow-up, especially those with atypical
hyperplasia, because many may develop lymphoproliferative disorders. Also, consider angioimmunoblastic
lymphadenopathy in patients with “hyperplasia.” This
can be done by an experienced immunopathologist.
Newer technology, such as positron emission tomography (PET) scans, could be considered as a means of
identifying the most appropriate node to biopsy. To assist
in the selection of which node to biopsy, one can choose
the node that is most active metabolically. This likely
would have a better chance of identifying the appropriate node than by random selection, especially in cases in
which no known diagnosis is present, other attempts
have failed, or review of the literature failed to provide
any supporting studies.

269
Patient with LYMPHADENOPATHY

B Recurrent

A Short-term
New-onset

Long-term ("7–14 days)

Close observation
Recurrent

C Laboratory tests
Note location of enlarged node(s)

D Head/neck

E Supraclavicular

Consider:
Head and
neck cancer
or
Lymphoma

Consider:
Lung cancer
GI tract cancer
Breast cancer

ENT examination

Abdominal CT
scan

Negative

Positive

Biopsy of
Supraclavicular
Lymph Node

Treatment

F Axilla

G Inguinal

Consider:
Breast cancer
Lung cancer
Skin cancer
Lymphoma
Chest film
Mammography

Positive

Biopsy of
Axillary Node

Treatment

Triple Endoscopy

Positive

Negative

Biopsy

Fine Needle
Biopsy of
Lymph Node

Consider:
Rectal cancer
Prostate cancer
Lymphoma
Gynecologic
cancer

Negative

Positive

CT scan of
abdomen and
pelvis

Biopsy
of Lymph
Node

Treatment

Negative

Negative

References
Copeland EM, McBride C. Axillary metastases from unknown primary
sites. Ann Surg 1973;178:25.
Faller DV. Diseases of lymph nodes and spleen. In Bennett JC, Plum F, eds.
Cecil Textbook of Medicine. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1996:968.
Moore RD, Weisberger AS, Bowerfind ES. An evaluation of lymphadenopathy in systemic disease. Arch Intern Med 1957;99:751.

H Generalized

Biopsy
of Inguinal
Lymph
Node

Laboratory
evaluation

Positive
Biopsy
and
Treatment

Saltzsein S. The fate of patients with nondiagnostic lymph node biopsies.
CA Cancer J Clin 1966;16:115.
Schroeder K, Franssila KO. Atypical hyperplasia of lymph nodes:
a follow-up study. Cancer 1979;44:1155.
Sinclair S, Beckman E, Eliman L. Biopsy of enlarged superficial lymph
nodes. JAMA 1974;228:602.
Zuelzer W, Kaplan J. The child with lymphadenopathy. Semin Hematol
1975;12:323.

