It is difficult to determine the incidence of animal bites because the vast majority of people bitten do not seek medical treatment. Most patients with bites who present for emergency care have been bitten by dogs, cats, or rodents. Most animal bites can be managed safely as outpatient procedures, except for those patients requiring surgical reconstruction or IV antibiotics for postbite infections. Treatment of bite injuries follows that for traumatic injury and laceration care, with special attention to wound irrigation and debridement and prophylaxis of potential infectious complications, including rabies and tetanus.
A. Initial treatment of bite injury requires aggressive wound cleansing with soap and water and copious irrigation. Wound cleansing within 3 hours of a bite injury substantially reduces the risk of rabies transmission. In most areas with a municipal water supply, tap water is perfectly sufficient for high-volume wound irrigation.
B. Patients should receive tetanus immunization for any bite with potential skin breakage if the patient has not been immunized within the previous 5 years.
Rabies treatment differs for different animal bites, and prevalence of rabies in specific animals may differ depending on the region of the country. Most rabies exposures in the United States occur from wild animals, with skunks, foxes, raccoons, and bats being the primary culprits. This varies greatly by region and country; one must contact the local heath department to determine whether a bite carries a risk for rabies.
Once a patient is infected with rabies, the infection is almost universally fatal. If a patient is bitten by a dog, cat, or ferret, rabies prophylaxis should be held unless the animal develops signs or symptoms of rabies. If the animal is unavailable, then consult the local health department. Bites by skunks, foxes, bats, raccoons, and any wild carnivores should be considered rabid, and the patient should be given prophylaxis for rabies. Any contact with any bat, including a scratch, should be considered a rabid bite, and prophylaxis should be administered. Other animals need to be considered individually.
C. Animal bites have different rates of infectious potential depending on the animal, the area of the wound, the extent of the wound, and the comorbidities of the patient (Table 1).
D. Many bite injuries result in crush injury to tissue and may result in penetrating injuries. Nonviable tissue must be removed, and all puncture-type injuries must be explored for possible retained foreign body or substance and to inspect underlying structure such as muscle fascia and tendon. Injuries to hands resulting from a closed-fist punch to a mouth that causes a laceration over the joint should be treated as a human bite.
E. Lacerations from bite injuries should be repaired in the typical fashion with approximation of viable tissue. Those bites that are at high risk for infection will have to be considered for management with delayed primary closure where the wound is essentially left open for 48-72 hours and then repaired. The cosmetic outcome and the functionality of the injured area must be considered (box and Table 2).
F. Prophylactic antibiotics may be indicated depending on the species of animal, the extent of tissue damage, and the comorbidities of the patient (Table 3).