MEDIASTINAL LYMPHADENOPATHY


Mediastinal lymphadenopathy, when found on a chest
radiograph, merits further evaluation. These findings
can be associated with either benign causes or malignant
disease. As with most radiographic findings, comparison to
old films can be helpful in the assessment of mediastinal
lymphadenopathy. Patients with stable lymphadenopathy
over several years often need no further evaluation.
A. The initial evaluation of a patient with mediastinal
lymphadenopathy should be a thorough history. Because granulomatous disease is a common cause, a
patient’s travel history should be obtained with a focus
on time spent in areas where histoplasmosis is endemic
and on potential exposures to tuberculosis. Additionally, associated symptoms such as fever, night sweats,
and weight loss should be elicited. Family history
should focus on relatives with sarcoid, lymphoma, or
other malignancies. The patient’s smoking history is
also relevant and should be reviewed.
B. Physical examination includes a thorough assessment
for peripheral lymphadenopathy because often these
lymph nodes are more easily accessible for biopsy.
Although many patients will have a normal pulmonary
examination, attention should be paid to signs of underlying lung disease. Additionally, a careful abdominal
examination looking for hepatosplenomegaly should be
performed.
C. For most patients, the next step in the evaluation
of mediastinal lymphadenopathy is a chest CT scan. The
CT scan allows better delineation of the lymphadenopathy and any associated parenchymal changes such as
those associated with sarcoidosis. What may appear as
lymphadenopathy on a chest radiograph may be found
to be large pulmonary arteries or a distinct mass on CT
imaging. Calcifications in the lymph nodes are more apparent on CT scan compared with chest radiograph.
The CT scan can also help guide the approach for potential biopsy.

494

D. In patients with historical findings concerning for
lymphoma (night sweats, weight loss, fevers) or
metastatic malignancy, the next step is biopsy of the
lymph nodes. If amenable, these nodes can be biopsied bronchoscopically; however, a mediastinoscopy is
often necessary. Because the architecture of the lymph
node is important, more than a fine needle aspiration
should be performed if a diagnosis of lymphoma is
entertained. Bronchoscopic biopsies can be used for
the lymph node staging of lung cancers as well.
E. In patients in whom sarcoid is suspected, bronchoscopic
biopsy of the lymph nodes and endobronchial and
transbronchial biopsies are often all that is needed for a
diagnosis. As discussed earlier, if there is concern for
malignancy, a mediastinoscopy may be needed. Patients
with concern for sarcoid should also have full pulmonary
function tests (PFTs) obtained.
F. In patients with a history and physical examination
results suggestive of infectious granulomatous disease,
it is reasonable to place a purified protein derivative
(PPD) skin test and send urine histoplasmosis antigen.
Patients with parenchymal changes consistent with
active tuberculosis (TB) should have three sputa evaluated for acid-fast bacilli. Once again, bronchoscopic
biopsy can be attempted, but, if unrevealing, proceeding to mediastinoscopy may be necessary. This is
particularly important when there is a question of
tuberculosis because cultures with sensitivities will
guide further therapy.
References
Duwe BV, Sterman DH, Musani AI. Tumors of the mediastinum. Chest
2005;128(4):2893–2909.
Sharafkhaneh A, Baaklini W, Gorin AB, et al. Yield of transbronchial
needle aspiration in diagnosis of mediastinal lesions. Chest
2003;124(6):2131–2135.
Sharma A, Fidias P, Hayman LA, et al. Patterns of lymphadenopathy in
thoracic malignancies. Radiographics 2004;24:419–434.

495
Patient with MEDIASTINAL LYMPHADENOPATHY

A History
B Physical examination

C Chest CT scan

D Fever, night sweats

weight loss, risk
factors for malignancy

E Family history of

sarcoid
Parenchymal changes
suggestive of sarcoid

Concern for lymphoma
or metastatic malignancy

Bronchoscopy
Wang biopsy
Transbronchial biopsy
Endobronchial biopsy

Mediastinoscopy
(occasionally
diagnosed by
bronchoscopy)

Full PFTs

Palpable peripheral
lymphadenopathy

F TB exposures

Lived in areas of
endemic fungi

PPD
Urine histoplasmosis
antigen

Mediastinoscopy
(occasionally
diagnosed by
bronchoscopy)

Lymph node biopsy

