MEMORY LOSS

Memory loss, once thought to be a common accompaniment of aging, is now known to be caused by a variety of
pathologic insults, many of which are more prevalent in
older age. The challenges for clinicians are to take memory complaints by individuals of any age seriously; take a
detailed history from the patient and a family member or
friend who knows the patient well; generate a differential
diagnosis based on the patient’s history and risk factors; and
pursue the relevant workup, monitoring, and treatment. It
is also important to recognize that although a family member or friend may bring memory loss to the attention of the
clinician, the patient may deny a problem. Lack of insight
into memory impairment is a common occurrence and
should be taken very seriously by the clinician.
One approach to the evaluation of the patient with
complaints of memory loss involves the answering of the
following questions: Is there true memory loss, and is daily
function affected? What type of memory loss is present,
and are other aspects of cognition or behavior affected?
What is the pathophysiology of memory loss (“where is
the lesion”)?
A. Patients and families may complain of memory loss
when in fact impairments in attention, language, or visuospatial function are the source of the problem. A
careful, structured history focused on daily activities can
often better delineate the problem. Were there particular incidents that prompted the evaluation? Does the
patient have difficulty keeping track of appointments,
plans, or schedules, or ask questions repeatedly? This may
be a symptom of anterograde memory impairment—
difficulty learning and retaining new information. Is the
patient unable to remember details of recent events,
either in personal/family life (e.g., a holiday gathering)
or in the news? Such symptoms may indicate a retrograde memory impairment—difficulty retrieving previously learned information. Complaints that “I walk into
another room and forget why I was going there” and the
like may indicate problems with attention or concentration. Difficulties retrieving the names of friends, family
members, or celebrities, or words in conversation may
indicate language dysfunction. Incidents in which the
patient became lost while driving or disoriented while
walking suggest visuospatial dysfunction or problems
with spatial memory. Concerns surrounding judgment,
decision making, ability to follow the steps of a process,
or multitasking may indicate executive dysfunction. In
addition to delineating symptom details, a discussion
about the impact of symptoms on routine daily life is
420

essential. Has the patient given up activities that were
previously performed? Does the patient make mistakes,
require additional assistance, or take longer to perform
tasks because of memory or cognitive difficulties? In an
older person, the presence of cognitive complaints in
the setting of impaired routine activities is the hallmark
of dementia (see the section Chronic Behavior Change).
A detailed history taken from the patient and a reliable
informant and emphasis on these areas will usually
reveal the nature of the symptoms and suggest how to
tailor the approach to examination and testing.
B. Once the history has illuminated the specificity of
symptoms, the office examination can be focused on
determining the presence and severity of signs. Behavioral observation of the patient with amnesia during
the interview will often reveal a normal-appearing
(awake, alert, interactive) person who is able to carry
on a seemingly routine conversation, although careful
attention by the clinician will often detect a relatively
limited repertoire of vague statements lacking substantive detail. The clinician should note the patient’s
awareness of cognitive difficulties and reactions to test
performance. Denial of symptoms/signs (anosognosia)
can be striking to observe, and usually indicates
significant impairment of memory and possibly other
cognitive systems. The purpose of a focused mental
status examination in the office is to pursue clinical
hypotheses generated by the history (see the References for resources describing the mental status examination). Are attention, language, and visuospatial
function in fact relatively preserved? What type of
memory loss is present? There are multiple memory
systems of the brain, and they can be subdivided a
number of ways. One useful heuristic is to consider
episodic, semantic, procedural, and working memory.
Episodic memory involves the ability to learn and retrieve “episodes of life.” It is subserved by the medial
temporal lobe (including the hippocampus) and other
components of the limbic system (including the basal
forebrain and mammillothalamic tract), as well as the
prefrontal cortex. Dysfunction of episodic memory
usually adheres to Ribot’s law, which states that recently learned information is more likely to be lost
than remotely learned information. In patients with
episodic memory loss, there are typically impairments
in the learning of new information (which can be
tested with word or picture lists in the office) and the
retrieval of recently learned information (testable
by asking about details of recent experiences in the
(Continued on page 422)

421
Patient with MEMORY LOSS

A History

Interview informant

B Medical, neurologic, and

mental status examination

Is true memory loss present?
Is there impairment in other cognitive domains?
Encephalopathy (see the section Acute Confusional State)
Dementia (see the section Chronic Behavior Change)
What type of memory loss is present?
Consider neuropsychologic testing

Cont’d on p 423

422
patient’s personal life [e.g., a family gathering] and corroborating with an informant), but memory for remote
information is often retained (e.g., where the patient
went to high school). Episodic memory impairment
may be caused by pathologic processes that affect the
medial temporal lobe and other limbic system anatomy;
these include Alzheimer’s disease, Korsakoff’s syndrome, hippocampal sclerosis, and posterior cerebral
artery or thalamic infarcts. Semantic memory refers
to general knowledge about the world, the source
of which is usually not remembered. Brain systems
underlying semantic memory include the lateral and
ventral temporal cortices, as well as the prefrontal cortex. Patients may have difficulty retrieving information
about important historical events, recalling the names
of presidents, or recognizing and describing the use
of common objects (e.g., a wristwatch or scissors). Semantic memory dysfunction may be seen in Alzheimer’s
disease and other neurodegenerative dementias or
with focal lesions of the temporal lobe, such as posterior cerebral artery stroke. Procedural memory involves the learning of skills, such as riding a bicycle or
playing an instrument. It is subserved by the supplementary motor cortex, basal ganglia, and cerebellum,
and is often spared in patients with episodic or semantic memory dysfunction. Disorders of the basal ganglia,
such as Parkinson’s disease and Huntington’s disease,
may cause procedural memory impairment. Working
memory involves the ability to keep information in
mind and manipulate it (usually to solve a problem).
The complex concept of working memory includes
aspects of attention, concentration, and executive
function, as well as “short-term memory.” Problems
with working memory usually present with difficulties
concentrating or paying attention, which can lead
to impairment in learning, judgment, and problem
solving. Tests of serial subtraction (7s from 100) or
reverse spelling (WORLD) or recitation (months of
the year backward) are useful to illuminate working
memory deficits. Working memory is subserved primarily by the dorsolateral prefrontal and lateral parietal cortices, as well as the caudate nucleus and other
subcortical structures. Since these brain regions are
affected in a variety of neurodegenerative diseases,
including Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, and
Huntington’s disease, working memory deficits can
be seen in these conditions. Moreover, they are often
seen in multiple sclerosis and other conditions that
affect the white-matter tracts that interconnect
these regions. The specific nature of memory and
cognitive dysfunction can be illuminated further with
neuropsychological testing.
C. It is important to define the character and severity of
memory loss through the history and examination,
which leads to a pathophysiologic differential diagnosis.

Additional history regarding medical conditions or
risks (e.g., thyroid dysfunction, anemia, cerebrovascular
risk factors, toxins or side effects of medications such
as anticholinergics) and a systems review (e.g., for depression, sleep disorders, seizures, head injury) can be
very useful in narrowing the differential. Systemic conditions may cause impairment in multiple memory
systems. Herpes simplex encephalitis is classically
associated with chronic amnesia because it affects the
medial temporal lobes, but often presents with a
febrile acute confusional state. The acuity of onset is
also a key historical element. Onset over seconds to
minutes may indicate stroke, seizure, or transient
global amnesia; onset over days to weeks may indicate
inflammatory, toxic/metabolic, or neoplastic processes;
onset over months to years often indicates neurodegenerative, neoplastic, nutritional deficiency, or psychiatric etiologies. Transient global amnesia involves
the acute onset of isolated memory impairment in the
absence of other cognitive or focal neurologic signs
and typically affects predominantly episodic memory,
usually resolving within 24–72 hours. Patients with a
history of seizure disorders, particularly complex partial seizures, may have chronic memory loss. In some
cases, this results from mesial temporal sclerosis. Patients with a history of immunosuppression (e.g., after
bone marrow transplant) may be susceptible to human
herpesvirus-6, which can present with a subacute focal
amnesic state. Chronic alcohol use or nutritional deficiency can lead to Korsakoff’s syndrome, a chronic
amnesia.
D. Next, the clinician should determine whether to
pursue neuroimaging, electroencephalography, and
laboratory (including lumbar puncture) evaluation.
Routine laboratory screening is important (e.g., for
thyroid dysfunction or vitamin B12 deficiency) and
should be tailored by the history and examination.
The clinician should strongly consider a neuroimaging
study in all cases of memory impairment. Both
structural (e.g., MRI) and functional (e.g., positron
emission tomography) neuroimaging can be useful.

References
Budson AE, Price BH. Memory dysfunction. N Engl J Med 2005;352
(7):692–699.
Mesulam M-M. Aphasia and other focal cerebral disorders. In Kasper DL,
Braunwald E, Fauci AS, et al, eds. Harrison’s Principles of Internal
Medicine, 16th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005:145–151.
Petersen RC. Disorders of memory. In Samuels MA, Feske SK, eds.
Office Practice of Neurology. Philadelphia: Churchill-Livingstone,
2003:902–912.
Weintraub S. Examining mental state. In Samuels MA, Feske SK, eds.
Office Practice of Neurology. Philadelphia: Churchill-Livingstone,
2003:850–858.

423
Patient with MEMORY LOSS
(Cont’d from p 421)

C Focal amnesia

Acute

Chronic

History if infectious
process

History of oncologic
illness or immunosuppression

Consider stroke
or other
cerebrovascular
event
Transient global
amnesia
Seizure
Psychiatric history

History of:
Seizure disorder
(mesial temporal
sclerosis)
Alcohol abuse or
nutritional
deficiency
(Korsakoff’s
syndrome)

Herpes simplex
encephalitis
Other meningoencephalitides
Whipple’s disease

Consider:
Paraneoplastic syndromes
(limbic encephalitis)
Viral illnesses (human
herpesvirus-6)

D Perform tailored laboratory

and neuroimaging studies
Consider EEG

