METABOLIC ALKALOSIS

A. Metabolic alkalosis is characterized by a primary increase in the serum bicarbonate concentration. This
occurs because of a loss of H! from the body or a gain
in HCO3". In its pure form, it manifests as alkalemia
(pH #7.40). As a compensatory mechanism, metabolic alkalosis leads to alveolar hypoventilation with
an increase in arterial carbon dioxide tension (Paco2),
which diminishes the change in pH that would otherwise occur. Metabolic alkalosis is the most common
acid-base disturbance observed in hospitalized patients, accounting for approximately 50% of all acidbase disorders. Common causes of a metabolic alkalosis are shown in Table 1. Urinary chloride
concentration provides a useful paradigm for classification of patients because it represents a convenient
measure of extracellular volume. Clinical manifestations are summarized in Table 2.
B. Pathophysiology of metabolic alkalosis should be considered in two phases—initiation and maintenance. Metabolic alkalosis is induced by virtue of a loss of acid, gain
of alkali, or the effects of a contracted extracellular fluid
compartment (increasing the bicarbonate concentration). Whenever a hydrogen ion is excreted, a bicarbonate ion is gained into the extracellular space. Examples of

Table 1 Causes of Metabolic Alkalosis
Chloride-Sensitive Alkalosis (urinary chloride $20 mEq/L)
Vomiting
Nasogastric suction
Diuretic use
Posthypercapnic
Chloride-Resistant Alkalosis (urinary chloride #20 mEq/L)
Diuretic use
Bartter’s syndrome
Potassium depletion
Milk-alkali syndrome

Table 2 Clinical Manifestations of Metabolic Alkalosis
Neuromuscular
Twitching
Muscle spasm
Positive Chvostek’s and/or Trousseau’s sign
Confusion
Lethargy
Seizure activity
Coma
Ventilatory Depression
Hypoxemia in patients with preexisting cardiopulmonary disorders

374

loss of acid include vomiting, nasogastric (NG) suction,
and aldosterone-mediated secretion of hydrogen ions in
the collecting duct (e.g., in primary hyperaldosteronism).
Gain of alkali may be observed in patients administered
alkali in excess of the kidney’s excretory capacity. Contraction alkalosis is most frequently observed in patients
treated zealously with diuretics or in patients with
chloride-rich diarrhea. The maintenance of metabolic
alkalosis is influenced by renal hypoperfusion (e.g., in
patients who are volume depleted) that results in secondary hyperaldosteronism and thus distal nephron secretion of hydrogen ions. Other important factors include chloride depletion from either GI or renal loss of
chloride. Chloride depletion enhances bicarbonate reabsorption through stimulation of the renin-angiotensinaldosterone system and by inhibition of bicarbonate secretion by the chloride/bicarbonate exchanger.
C. Diagnostic approach to metabolic alkalosis:
1. Establish the presence of metabolic alkalosis and
assess whether the secondary (compensatory)
physiologic response is appropriate.
2. Identify the underlying cause that precipitated
alkalosis.
3. Assess the factors responsible for maintaining alkalosis, such as extracellular volume depletion. The treatment of a metabolic alkalosis depends on identifying
and repairing the underlying cause (e.g., repairing
the volume, discontinuing NG suction, or stopping
diuretic therapy).
D. The treatment of metabolic alkalosis comprises general
therapy based on the severity of the alkalosis and more
specific therapy based on the underlying initiating
cause of the metabolic alkalosis.
General therapy: Treatment of asymptomatic patients with a mild to moderate alkalosis (pH 7.45–7.6)
should involve volume repletion; if necessary, the use of
acetazolamide (250–500 mg bid or tid) to cause an alkaline urine rich in bicarbonate may be sufficient. For
patients with more severe metabolic alkalosis (pH
#7.60) or those who are symptomatic, hydrochloric
acid infusion may be necessary. This is usually administered as a 0.1–0.2 M HCl solution into a large vein.
Specific therapy: This should be determined by
whether the patient has a “chloride-responsive” or “chloride-resistant” alkalosis. Chloride-responsive alkalosis in
the setting of volume depletion is best treated with IV
infusion of isotonic sodium chloride solution. However,
chloride-responsive alkalosis in edematous states such
as congestive heart failure usually necessitates more

375
Patient with Suspected METABOLIC ALKALOSIS

A Metabolic alkalosis characterized

by serum bicarbonate #24 mEq/L

B Check ABG

Check blood chemistries

Metabolic alkalosis:
PCO2 % (0.7 & HCO3") ! 21.
' $1 suggests mixed normal-AG
and high-AG acidosis;
':' #2 suggests coexisting
metabolic alkalosis.

C Confirm alkalosis
Use formula
Delta/Delta

D Check urine chloride

Chloride-sensitive alkalosis
(urine chloride $20 mEq/L)

Chloride-resistant alkalosis
(urine chloride #20 mEq/L)

GI causes: vomiting, NG suction,
chloride-wasting diarrhea, villous
adenoma of colon
Renal causes: diuretic use, poorly
reabsorbable anion (carbenicillin,
penicillin)
Posthypercapnia
Cystic fibrosis
Achlorhydria
Contraction alkalosis

Hypertensive patient: primary
hyperaldosteronism, Cushing’s
syndrome, Liddle’s syndrome,
exogenous steroids, excess
mineralocorticoid intake,
glycyrrhizic acid
Normotensive patient:
Bartter’s syndrome or Gitelman’s
syndrome, hypokalemia

vigorous diuresis (e.g., using a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor [e.g., acetazolamide] or a potassium-sparing
diuretic [e.g., spironolactone, amiloride, triamterene]).
In patients with a chloride-resistant metabolic alkalosis,
if the patient has primary hyperaldosteronism, then
surgical resection of the tumor and/or use of an aldosterone antagonist spironolactone should be considered. In
glucocorticoid-remediable hyperaldosteronism, metabolic alkalosis and hypertension are responsive to
dexamethasone.
In patients with Bartter’s syndrome and Gitelman’s syndrome, treatment of the metabolic alkalosis

necessitates the use of potassium supplementation,
potassium-sparing diuretics, NSAIDs, or angiotensinconverting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors. In contrast,
metabolic alkalosis in Liddle’s syndrome should be
treated with amiloride or triamterene but not with
spironolactone.
References
Galla JH. Metabolic alkalosis. J Am Soc Nephrol 2000;11(2):369–375.
Khanna A, Kurtzman NA. Metabolic alkalosis. J Nephrol 2006 Mar;19
Suppl 9:S86–S96.
Laski ME, Sabatini S. Metabolic alkalosis, bedside and bench. Semin
Nephrol 2006;26(6):404–421.

