METABOLIC ACIDOSIS

A. Metabolic acidosis is characterized by a primary decrease in the serum bicarbonate concentration, which
is a result of depletion of bicarbonate or by endogenous consumption of bicarbonate to buffer exogenous
or endogenous generation of acid. Metabolic acidosis
can be subdivided into elevated anion gap (AG)
or normal AG acidosis (Table 1). Renal tubular acidosis
(RTA) is a classical cause for a normal AG metabolic
acidosis (Table 2). In proximal RTA the primary defect
is impaired reabsorption of bicarbonate by the proximal tubule. It frequently is associated with defective
phosphate, glucose, urate, and amino acid resorption.
With distal RTA, the primary defect is an inability to
maximally acidify the urine. Type III RTA is a combination of type I and type II RTA. Type IV RTA is characterized by impaired urinary acidification because of
hypoaldosteronism. An elevated AG acidosis may occur commonly as a complication of a systemic illness.
The AG is equal to the difference between the plasma
concentrations of the measured plasma cation (i.e.,
Na!) and the measured anions (i.e., chloride [Cl"],
HCO3"). AG calculation # (Na!) " ([Cl"] ! [HCO3"]).
The normal AG is 8"16 mEq/L, with an average value
of 12. Causes of a high AG, lactic acidosis, ketoacidosis,
renal failure, and ingestions are salicylate, methanol or
formaldehyde (formate), ethylene glycol (glycolate,
oxalate), paraldehyde (organic anions), sulfur (SO4"),
phenformin/metformin, and pyroglutamic acidemia
(5-oxoprolinemia). The mnemonic MUDPILES is
Table 1 Causes of Metabolic Acidosis
Normal Anion Gap
GI
Diarrhea
Ureteroileostomy
Renal
Renal tubular acidosis
Aldosterone deficiency (hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism)
Drugs
Ammonium chloride
Lysine or arginine hydrochloride
Elevated Anion Gap
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Alcoholic ketoacidosis
Starvation ketoacidosis
Lactic acidosis
Toxic ingestion
Methanol
Ethylene glycol
Salicylates
Paraldehyde
Renal failure

372

Table 2 Key Features of Renal Tubular Acidosis
RTA Type

Urine pH

Type I RTA (distal)

%5.5

Type II RTA (proximal)
Type IV RTA
(hyporeninemic
hypoaldosteronism)

$5.5
$5.5

Serum Potassium
Normal limits or
decreased
Decreased
Increased

popular: M—methanol; U—uremia; D—diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), AKA; P—paraldehyde, phenformin; I—iron, isoniazid; L—lactic (i.e., CO, cyanide);
E—ethylene glycol; and S—salicylates.
B. The clinical features of metabolic acidosis are nonspecific. The most common manifestation is hyperventilation because the respiratory center in the brainstem is
stimulated to compensate for the acidosis. At its most
severe, patients report air hunger. Severe metabolic
acidosis may also be associated with hemodynamic instability—a problem most frequently encountered in
the intensive care unit. Other manifestations of metabolic acidosis reflect the underlying cause or trigger
(e.g., diarrhea, DKA, drug ingestion). The diagnostic
approach pivots on the measurement of serum electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, and an ABG level. A low serum
HCO3" and a pH $7.40 on ABG analysis confirm metabolic acidosis. The AG should be calculated to help
with the differential diagnosis of the metabolic acidosis
and to diagnose mixed disorders. A high-AG acidosis is
present if the AG is %10–12 mEq/L, and a non-AG
acidosis is present if the AG is $10"12 mEq/L. If the
AG is elevated, the osmolar gap should be calculated
by subtracting the calculated serum osmolality from
the measured serum osmolality. (Ethylene glycol and
methanol poisoning increase the AG and the osmolar
gap.) In the case of an increased AG, the ratio of AG
and HCO3" should be calculated (&:&). A &:& $1
suggests mixed normal-AG and high-AG acidosis; an
&:& %2 suggests coexisting metabolic alkalosis. Increases in AG may be observed in nonacidotic states,
such as metabolic alkalosis and respiratory alkalosis;
however, increases in AG beyond 3–5 mEq/L are unusual. Assessment of the urinary anion gap (UAG) can
also be helpful in diagnosis. The urine anion gap
(UAG) # (UNa ! UK) " UCl. The UAG is normally
positive (range: 30–50). A negative UAG suggests renal
excretion of unmeasured cation (e.g., NH4!; an extrarenal acidosis). A positive UAG suggests minimal renal

373
Patient with Suspected METABOLIC ACIDOSIS

A Metabolic acidosis suspected

Serum bicarbonate $20 mEq/L
Anion gap

High anion gap

Low anion gap

Methanol
Uremia
DKA/alcoholic
Paraldehyde
Isoniazid
Lactic acidosis
Alcohol/ethylene glycol
Salicylates

Hyperalimentation
Acetazolamide
Renal tubular acidosis
Diarrhea
Ureteropelvic shunt
Posthypocapnia
Spironolactone

B Check ABG

Check blood chemistries

C Confirm acidosis
Winter’s formula
Delta/Delta

Winter’s formula:
PCO2 # (1.5 ' HCO3") ! 8.
& $1 suggests mixed normal-AG
and high-AG acidosis;
&:& %2 suggests coexisting
metabolic alkalosis.

D Initiate treatment if pH $7.1

excretion of unmeasured cation (e.g., NH4!). Causes
include proximal RTA type II, distal RTA or type I, or
type IV RTA. Other tests can be performed, including
a screen for toxins (e.g., ethylene glycol, salicylate) and
tests for metabolic disorders (e.g., ketoacidosis, lactic
acidosis) that are known to elevate the AG.
C. Lactic acidosis can be classified as type A, which occurs
as a consequence of tissue hypoxia from tissue hypoperfusion or reduced arterial oxygen content. The
second category is type B, which does not reflect tissue
hypoxia. The most common category is type B1—from
sepsis, hepatic failure, renal failure, diabetes mellitus,
cancer, malaria, or cholera. The second category is
type B2 from drugs or toxins (e.g., acetaminophen,
ethanol, salicylates, and ethylene glycol). The third
category is type B3, reflecting strenuous muscular
exercise, grand mal seizures, and d-lactic acidosis. The
clinical presentation of lactic acidosis reflects the underlying etiology (e.g., sepsis or drug ingestion).
D. Treatment of metabolic acidosis depends on the underlying cause and the severity of manifestations. A general
rule is that treatment should be initiated if the pH is

$7.1, especially when associated with hemodynamic
instability. In patients with chronic metabolic acidosis,
such as a patient with RTA, oral repletion with sodium
bicarbonate is usually sufficient. The HCO3" deficit can
be calculated by using the following equation: HCO3"
deficit # deficit/L (desired serum HCO3" " measured
HCO3") ' 0.5 ' body weight (volume of distribution
for HCO3"). Sodium bicarbonate can be administered
intravenously.

References
Ayers P, Warrington L. Diagnosis and treatment of simple acid-base disorders. Nutr Clin Pract 2008;23(2):122–127.
Kraut JA, Madias NE. Serum anion gap: its uses and limitations in
clinical medicine. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2007;2(1):162–174. Epub
2006 Dec 6.
Kwon KT, Tsai VW. Metabolic emergencies. Emerg Med Clin North Am
2007;25(4):1041–1060, vi.
Madias NE. Lactic acidosis. Kidney Int 1986;29(3):752–774.
Morris CG, Low J. Metabolic acidosis in the critically ill: part 2. causes
and treatment. Anaesthesia 2008;63(4):396–411.
Rodríguez Soriano J. Renal tubular acidosis: the clinical entity. J Am
Soc Nephrol 2002;13(8):2160–2170.

