MONOARTICULAR ARTHRITIS

A. A complete history and physical examination are crucial
and are the most useful tools for making the correct
diagnosis. Joint pain may result from abnormalities in
the joint itself, in adjacent bone, or from surrounding
ligaments, tendons, bursae, or soft tissues. Pain may also
be referred from a neuropathic condition or pathology
in another joint. Monarthritis of acute onset (hours to
days) usually indicates trauma, infection, or a crystalinduced process. Rarely, it may represent an atypical
presentation of a systemic inflammatory condition.
Careful questioning may reveal prior joint symptoms,
stiffness, or systemic symptoms such as fatigue. Monarthritis persisting !4–6 weeks may indicate a chronic
condition such as atypical infection, osteoarthritis,
tumor, or systemic inflammatory disease.
B. Aspiration of the affected joint for synovial fluid analysis is always indicated to evaluate monarthritis. Synovial
fluid should be sent for WBC count with differential,
Gram stain, culture, and crystal analysis. Additional
tests do not generally improve diagnostic sensitivity.
Synovial fluid WBC count is the single most important
measurement to separate noninflammatory from inflammatory processes. With appropriate clinical correlation, a WBC count "2000 cells/mm3 represents a noninflammatory process, whereas higher WBC counts
represent inflammatory conditions. Polymorphonuclear
leukocyte-predominant effusions (!75% cell count)
also indicate an acute inflammatory process.
C. Acute bacterial arthritis is a medical emergency, and
rapid treatment is warranted to prevent irreversible
cartilage and bone destruction. Acute bacterial arthritis
may be divided into nongonococcal and gonococcal
causes. Gram-positive organisms, particularly Staphylococcus aureus, are the most common agents to cause
nongonococcal bacterial arthritis. Nongonococcal infection is often associated with a primary focus of infection elsewhere. Therefore, an unexplained arthritis in
the setting of bacteremia, pneumonia, or other infection should be presumed to represent septic arthritis.
Disseminated gonococcal infection (DGI) may present
as a painful monarthritis, polyarthritis (usually migratory [i.e., as one joint is improving, another is becoming
inflamed]), or tenosynovitis. Subtle skin lesions, including macules, pustules, and vesicles, may also be present. Because synovial fluid cultures from patients with
DGI are infrequently positive, evidence for infection
should be sought from other sites (genitourinary, pharyngeal, rectal, skin lesions).
D. The diagnosis of gouty arthritis is established by the
presence of intracellular needle-shaped, negatively
510

birefringent crystals, whereas rhomboid-shaped, positively birefringent crystals indicate calcium pyrophosphate deposition disease (CPPD, also known as pseudogout). In patients "60 years of age, consider screening
for associated disorders such as hemochromatosis, hyperparathyroidism, and hypothyroidism. Detection of
calcium hydroxyapatite crystals is more difficult because it requires electron microscopy or Alizarin Red
staining if clinically suspected. Although rare,
identification of crystals does not negate the possibility
of coexistent infection, so joint cultures should also be
followed.
E. If analysis of synovial fluid does not reveal the diagnosis, radiographs of the affected joints and contralateral joints should be performed. Common findings
include osteoarthritis and chondrocalcinosis (suggesting CPPD). Less often, unsuspected bony lesions
such as fracture, malignancy, osteomyelitis, or Paget’s
disease may be detected. Repeat synovial fluid analysis should be done with additional cultures and smears
for acid-fast bacteria and fungus. In endemic areas, a
Lyme titer should be sent, especially if there is a history of rash, tick bite, or appropriate exposure. Rheumatoid factor (RF), anticyclic citrullinated antibody,
and ANA may be sent to increase the sensitivity of
detecting a systemic inflammatory disease such as an
atypical presentation of rheumatoid arthritis or systemic lupus erythematosus.
F. If the diagnosis is still not clear, close observation is
warranted. If symptoms remit, no further workup is
necessary. Alternatively, additional axial or peripheral
arthritic symptoms may develop to suggest evolution
into a systemic inflammatory disease. If monarthritis
persists for 4–6 weeks in the absence of a clear diagnosis, synovial biopsy should be considered to diagnose
tuberculous or fungal infections, amyloid, pigmented
villonodular synovitis, or other tumors.
G. Noninflammatory, nonbloody effusions should prompt
joint radiography to examine for trauma, osteoarthritis,
neuropathic arthritis, or avascular necrosis (AVN).
Osteoarthritis may present with significant effusions with
little inflammation compared to the degree of cartilage
and bone destruction. Neuropathic arthropathy is most
commonly associated with diabetes but may occur in a
variety of neurologic diseases. Loss of pain and proprioceptive sensation allows joint movement to exceed normal range of motion, leading to significant joint instability. Ultimately, dislocation and deformity may occur.
AVN is a common cause of shoulder, hip, or knee monarthritis in younger people requiring corticosteroids for

511
Patient with MONOARTICULAR ARTHRITIS

A History

Physical examination

B Synovial fluid analysis

WBC count with differential
Gram stain and culture
Crystal analysis

Inflammatory (synovial WBC count !2000 cells/mm3)

C Gram stain
or culture
positive

D Crystals
present

Noninflammatory (synovial WBC count "2000 cells/mm3)

G Nonbloody effusion

E Studies

negative

Bloody effusion

Radiography
Gout
CPPD

Infectious
arthritis

Radiography
Repeat synovial
fluid analysis
Consider Lyme
titer, RF, ANA

Trauma
Osteoarthritis
Neuropathic
arthritis
AVN

No diagnosis

Remission

Persistent
monarthritis
(4–6 wk)

F

H Studies

positive

Hemarthrosis

Evolution
into axial
involvement

Evolution into
polyarthritis

I

Studies
negative

Possible tumor

Synovial
Biopsy

Synovial
Biopsy

No diagnosis
Follow

Radiography
Coagulation studies
Anticoagulant use

Tuberculous
arthritis
Fungal arthritis
Pigmented
villonodular
synovitis
Amyloidosis
Other tumors

systemic diseases. If a high suspicion for AVN exists and
radiographs are negative, MRI is more sensitive for detecting early changes associated with AVN. Similarly, if
there is a history of trauma with persistent clicking, locking, or “give way” symptoms, MRI may be indicated to
better evaluate joint soft-tissue structures.
H. Hemarthrosis may result from trauma, anticoagulant
therapy, inherited coagulopathies, pigmented villonodular synovitis, or synovial hemangiomas. True hemarthrosis must be distinguished from a traumatic tap. Effusions
from hemarthrosis are uniformly bloody and do not
spontaneously clot.

I. Persistent bloody effusions in the absence of trauma or
coagulopathy suggest tumor, particularly pigmented
villonodular synovitis. In such cases, synovial biopsy is
warranted for further diagnosis.
References
McCune WJ, Golbus J. Monarticular arthritis. In Harris ED, Budd RC,
Genovese MC, et al, eds. Kelley’s Textbook of Rheumatology, 7th ed.
Philadelphia: Saunders, 2005.
Schumacher HR. Monarticular joint disease. In Klippel JH, Crofford LJ,
Stone JH, Weyand CM, eds. Primer on the Rheumatic Diseases, 12th
ed. Atlanta: Arthritis Foundation, 2001.

