MULTIPLE PULMONARY NODULES

A. It is increasingly common to find multiple small nodules on a CT scan that was done for other reasons. The
initial evaluation should then include a comprehensive
history and a physical examination. The history should
focus on risks related to possible malignancy, infection,
and underlying rheumatologic disease because these
broad categories are responsible for the majority of
these nodules. Specifically, determine whether the
patient is immunocompromised because this broadens
the differential greatly. Also explore recent exposures
and recent travel. A past history of malignancy raises
the possibility of metastatic disease, whereas associated symptoms of fever, weight loss, and night sweats
may suggest lymphoma or infection.
B. As with a solitary pulmonary nodule, always seek out
old radiographic images. Stability over months to years
makes a benign process much more likely and rapid
growth often favors infection. It should also be noted
that with the increased use of CT scans, there are more
patients who have multiple tiny (!5 mm) nodules. For
the most part, in patients without high-risk factors,
these can be followed with serial CT scans. Often, in a
low-risk patient, one additional CT scan is all that is
required.
C. If the history raises the concern for infectious etiologies, there are certain patterns on CT scan that suggest
particular pathogens. Peripheral nodules, particularly
those which cavitate, suggest septic emboli. Blood cultures and a search for a source of the emboli are appropriate. Lower lobe predominance is common with
pulmonary abscesses, septic emboli, and infection with
Paragonimus westermani. Whereas more common to
cause a solitary pulmonary nodule, Dirofilaria (dog
heartworm) can also cause multiple nodules. Multiple,
small calcified nodules suggests prior granulomatous
disease, including previous histoplasmosis infection or
mycobacterial infection.
D. Other typical patterns include the “halo sign” of adjacent hemorrhage seen with angio-invasive aspergillosis
and “tree-in-bud” changes of bronchiolitis classically
seen with atypical mycobacterial infection. Innumerable, small nodules should make the physician consider
miliary tuberculosis infection. Immunocompromised
patients can present with nodules resulting from a variety of other organisms, including, but not limited to,
nocardia, Pneumocystis, varicella, and other viruses.
Also, common infections can present atypically in hosts

498

E.

F.

G.

H.

with impaired immune systems, so the differential
should be kept broad in this population. Sputum, bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL), serologies and more rarely a surgical lung biopsy may all play
a role in determining a diagnosis.
In a patient with known malignancy, there should
always be concern for metastatic disease presenting as
multiple pulmonary nodules. Although many cancers
can metastasize to the lung, certain types are more
likely to do so. These include colon, breast, prostate,
thyroid, renal, testicular, melanoma, and sarcoma. If
the patient does not have known metastatic disease, it
is reasonable to proceed with surgical biopsy of one of
these lesions for guidance of future therapy.
Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma can present as multiple
pulmonary nodules without associated lymphadenopathy. Primary lung cancer much more commonly presents as a solitary pulmonary nodule. That said, of the
subtypes of lung cancer, bronchoalveolar cell carcinoma more often presents with multiple foci of disease. These lesions are often at least in part ground
glass density on CT scan. If considering either lymphoma or lung cancer, a diagnosis should be aggressively pursued. Whereas a bronchoscopy with transbronchial biopsy and bronchial washings can be a first
step, most of these lesions require surgical biopsy.
A variety of rheumatologic diseases can present with
pulmonary nodules but the most common is rheumatoid arthritis. Pulmonary nodules are more common
when the patient also has cutaneous nodules and are
found more often in men than in women. Although
atypical, sarcoid can also present as nodules in the
lungs.
There are a variety of miscellaneous causes of multiple
pulmonary nodules, most of which are suggested by
history. A patient with an exposure to silica, talc, or
coal dust may present with large, upper lobe predominant nodules often on a background of fibrosis.
Patients with a history of IV drug abuse may also present with multiple nodules, which are a result of an
inflammatory response to the talc used to “cut” the
illicit drug. A vessel leading into a nodule or a lobular
contour to a nodule should suggest arteriovenous malformations (AVMs), which can be confirmed by CT or
traditional angiography. If multiple AVMs are found,
consider a diagnosis of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT).

499
Patient with MULTIPLE PULMONARY NODULES

A

History
Infectious exposures
Geographic exposures
Previous malignancy
Associated systemic
complaints
Physical examination

B

C

Infectious causes

Compare to old images

Malignant causes

G

CT characteristics

Lower lobe
predominant
Septic emboli—
blood cultures
Abscesses
Paragonimus
Westermani—
sputum,
serologies

Calcified
Histoplasmosis—
urine antigen
Tuberculosis—
sputum, BAL

D
Cavitary
Septic emboli—
blood cultures

Treat infection

E

Other causes

Treat underlying
disease
CT characteristics

Other
Aspergillus (halo)—
sputum, BAL, TB biopsy
Atypical mycobacteria
(tree-in-bud)—sputum, BAL
TB (miliary)
sputum, BAL

Metastatic disease
Thyroid
Melanoma
Breast
Testicular
Colon
Prostate
Sarcoma

Rheumatologic
disease
Rheumatoid
arthritis
Sarcoid

H

F
Primary
lymphoma

H Lower lobe I
Upper lobe
AVM
Silicosis
Pneumoconiosis
Talcosis
Consider:
Angiogram
CT angiogram
Rarely need
biopsy—
clinical
diagnosis

Other
Wegener’s
granulomatosis
(cavitary)

Bronchoalveolar
carcinoma

Treat with
immunosuppressives

Antineutrophilic
cytoplasmic
antibodies
Surgical biopsy

Consider biopsy to
make diagnosis

Consider biopsy if treatment
plan will be altered

I. Wegener’s granulomatosis can present as multiple pulmonary nodules, often cavitary in nature. Associated
sinus disease, renal disease, or hemoptysis should
raise the possibility of this diagnosis. A strongly positive ANCA is often present, but either a surgical lung
or percutaneous kidney biopsy is commonly needed
to make the diagnosis of Wegener’s granulomatosis.

References
Fraser RS, Paré PD. Fraser and Paré’s Diagnosis of Diseases of the
Chest, ed 4, Philadelphia:W.B. Saunders, 1999.
Gould MK, Fletcher J, Iannettoni MD, et al. Evaluation of patients
with pulmonary nodules: when is it lung cancer? ACCP evidencebased clinical practice guidelines (2nd edition). Chest 2007;132
(3 Suppl):108S–130S.
Lillington GA, Caskey CI. Evaluation and management of solitary and
multiple pulmonary nodules. Clin Chest Med 1993;14(1):111–119.
Viggiano RW, Swensen SJ, Rosenow EC 3rd. Evaluation and management
of solitary and multiple pulmonary nodules. Clin Chest Med
1992;13(1):83–95.

