“True” cramps are sudden, periodic, involuntary, painful contractions of a muscle, or part of a muscle, that last from seconds to several minutes. They are usually relieved by stretching of the muscle. Cramps must be differentiated from myalgias: muscle pains that are not associated with muscle contractions. Contractions may also occur without pain. These may be associated with specific activities or occupations, such as “writer's cramp.” These contractions are actually dystonias that typically affect “over-learned” tasks, such as writing or playing an instrument. Cramps are often confused with contractures, seen in certain metabolic myopathies such as phosphorylase deficiency (McArdle's disease). Contractures usually occur with intense exercise and result from depletion of muscle energy stores. There may also be a history of myoglobinuria. Contractures, unlike cramps, are electrically silent on electromyography (EMG). True cramps may occur spontaneously at rest, but more often they are precipitated by a muscle contraction. They are neural in origin, caused by a hyperexcitability of the motor neurons supplying the muscle. In many cases the reason for recurrent cramps remains unclear even after a complete diagnostic evaluation. Treatment with quinine sulfate often is helpful in controlling nocturnal cramps. Frequent daytime cramps may respond to carbamazepine or amitriptyline. After establishing through history that the patient suffers with true cramps, the physician should then explore whether they occur at rest or with exercise.
A. In older patients, children, and pregnant women, leg cramps tend to occur at rest, often at night, after unusual daytime activity, and especially when the feet are cold. The neurologic examination and serum creatine kinase (CK) and aldolase levels are normal. These may require no treatment or be improved by stretching the affected muscle three times a day.
B. Cramps occurring at rest or precipitated by minor exercise may have a specific underlying cause and are listed in the accompanying diagram. These causes should be identified by a thorough history and laboratory examinations, including thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), routine chemistry panel (including renal and liver function studies), CK, B12, and folate. These cramps usually lessen or resolve with treatment of the underlying problem.
C. For frequent cramps precipitated during or after exercise, in addition to the laboratory tests listed previously perform a forearm exercise test in which serum lactate, pyruvate, and ammonia are measured at rest and after 1 minute of exercise every minute for 5 minutes. EMG should be performed, looking for evidence of myopathy. Muscle biopsy should be considered. A history of myoglobinuria must be sought.
D. Exercise intolerance, along with cramps or myalgia, characterizes the metabolic myopathies. These disorders commonly result in myoglobinuria after especially strenuous exercise. All but the last two listed are abnormalities of glycogen or glucose metabolism. A “second-wind phenomenon” is a specific feature of myophosphorylase deficiency in which, after the onset of mild exertional cramps, patients rest briefly and then may resume the exercise at the previous or a slightly reduced level. Carnitine palmitoyl transferase deficiency is a disorder of lipid metabolism in which cramps are precipitated by more prolonged strenuous exercise.
E. Cramps, and other entities that may be confused with cramps, occur in a variety of neurologic and neuromuscular disorders. These disorders are accompanied by weakness and/or sensory loss on neurologic examination. Because investigations to evaluate the diagnostic possibilities vary from patient to patient in this situation, such cases are usually best handled by a neurologist. Many of the conditions are treatable.
F. It is important to remember that leg pain and cramps in adults that are precipitated by exercise and promptly relieved by rest often are the result of ischemia from peripheral vascular disease. These patients with “vascular claudication” may have risk factors for cardiovascular disease along with trophic changes and reduced pulses in their legs. Surgical treatment and addressing the cardiovascular risk factors can be successful.

