NARROW-COMPLEX TACHYCARDIA

Clinical Evaluation of the Patient with
NARROW-COMPLEX TACHYCARDIA
A. The patient presenting to the clinician with narrowcomplex tachycardia should be immediately assessed for
hemodynamic compromise and treated according to
Advanced Cardiac Life Support (ACLS) guidelines. After stabilization, evaluation and therapy can ensue. Narrow-complex tachycardia is almost always a result of
supraventricular tachycardias (SVTs), particularly if the
QRS complex in tachycardia is identical to that in sinus
rhythm.
B. The history and physical examination should be directed
toward the search for underlying structural heart disease. Evidence of hemodynamic compromise during
tachycardia, including syncope, presyncope, chest discomfort, or dyspnea, should be ascertained. Evaluation
of the ECG in sinus rhythm should focus on the presence or absence of preexcitation. Echocardiography
should be strongly considered in patients with narrowcomplex tachycardia to assess the presence of underlying structural heart disease.
C. The presence of preexcitation warrants referral to an
electrophysiologist for evaluation of the appropriateness of diagnostic electrophysiologic study (EPS) and

60

possible catheter ablation in the setting of preexcitation
and potential atrioventricular reciprocating tachycardia
(AVRT). If preexcitation is not clearly manifest, significant symptoms, particularly syncope, also warrant evaluation by an electrophysiologist.
D. If the SVT is sustained and symptomatic, particularly if
medical therapy has failed to suppress episodes, the
patient should be referred to an electrophysiologist for
possible EPS and catheter ablation. The differential
diagnosis includes atrioventicular nodal reentrant tachycardia (AVNRT), AVRT, atrial tachycardia, PJRT (socalled permanent junctional reciprocating tachycardia),
and atrial flutter with regular ventricular response.
E. If atrial fibrillation, multifocal atrial tachycardia (MAT),
or atrial flutter are diagnosed, medical therapy may
be initiated. The goals of medical therapy include
symptom relief, rate control during tachycardia, and
consideration of anticoagulation. Failure of medical
therapy to relieve symptoms or control ventricular
rate warrants consideration of catheter ablation.

61
Clinical Evaluation of the
Patient with NARROW-COMPLEX TACHYCARDIA

A Evaluation of patient
during tachycardia

Hemodynamic
compromise

Hemodynamically
stable

ACLS Protocol

ECG in sinus rhythm

B History and physical

Exclude:
Structural heart disease
(consider echocardiography)

examination

C Preexcitation

No preexcitation

Suspect AVRT
Syncope or
other debilitating
symptoms

Refer to an
electrophysiologist

No syncope

D Sustained SVT

D No sustained SVT
E Likely atrial fibrillation,

Medical Therapy

Medical therapy fails

Refer to an
electrophysiologist

MAT, or atrial flutter
with variable
ventricular response

No significant
symptoms

Medical Therapy
as Indicated

Continue
Medical Therapy
Remains
symptomatic

No significant
symptoms

Refer to an
electrophysiologist

Continue
Medical Therapy

62

Electrocardiographic Evaluation of the
Patient with
NARROW-COMPLEX TACHYCARDIA
A. Electrocardiographic evaluation of narrow-complex
tachycardia should always begin with evaluation of the
ECG in sinus rhythm, if available. Evidence of preexcitation should be sought, and if it is found, AVRT
should be suspected.
B. If no preexcitation is seen, evaluation of the ECG in
tachycardia should begin with determining whether
the RR interval is regular and constant or variable. A
variable RR interval suggests atrial fibrillation, atrial
tachycardia with variable ventricular response, atrial
flutter with variable ventricular response, or MAT. If
the RR interval is regular and fixed, the differential
diagnosis remains broad. Evaluation should then proceed to searching for visible P waves.
C. If P waves are not clearly visible during tachycardia,
AVNRT is likely because typical AVNRT using antegrade slow pathway conduction and retrograde fast
pathway conduction usually results in P waves “buried”
in the QRS complex. If more P waves than R waves are
present (i.e., the atrial rate exceeds the ventricular
rate), atrial tachycardia or atrial flutter are likely
because this finding demonstrates that the AV node is
not necessary to maintain the tachycardia circuit. If
there is a 1:1 relationship between P and R waves,
analysis should then proceed to the RP interval.
D. A long RP interval is defined as an RP interval greater
than the PR interval. A short RP interval is the
opposite, with an RP interval less than the PR interval.

A long RP interval suggests tachycardias with rapid
antegrade AV nodal conduction. This includes atrial
tachycardia, PJRT, inappropriate sinus tachycardia, sinus reentry, and atypical AVNRT (fast pathway antegrade limb, slow pathway retrograde limb). A short RP
interval suggests rapid retrograde limb conduction of
the tachycardia circuit, including typical AVNRT and
AVRT using an accessory pathway.
E. In short RP tachycardias, an RP interval !70 ms is
consistent with AVNRT, whereas an RP interval "70
ms cannot distinguish between AVNRT and AVRT using an accessory pathway. Because retrograde atrial
activation during AVRT follows antegrade AV nodal,
His-Purkinje, and ventricular depolarization leading to
retrograde accessory pathway depolarization, the resultant RP (ventricular to atrial depolarization) interval is
almost never !70 ms.
References
Blomström-Lundqvist C, Scheinman MM, Aliot EM, et al. CC/AHA/ESC
guidelines for the management of patients with supraventricular
arrhythmias—executive summary. A report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines and the European Society of Cardiology Committee for Practice
Guidelines (Writing Committee to Develop Guidelines for the Management of Patients with Supraventricular Arrhythmias) developed in collaboration with NASPE-Heart Rhythm Society. J Am Coll Cardiol
2003;42(8):1493–1531.
Josephson ME. Clinical Cardiac Electrophysiology: Techniques and
Interpretations, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 2001.
Morady F. Catheter ablation of supraventricular arrhythmias. J Cardiovasc
Electrophysiol 2004;15(1):124–129.
Wellens HJJ. Twenty-five years of insights into the mechanisms of
supraventricular arrhythmias. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 2003;
14:1–6.

63
Electrocardiographic Evaluation of the
Patient with NARROW-COMPLEX TACHYCARDIA

A ECG in sinus rhythm

Preexcitation

No preexcitation

B ECG in tachycardia

AVNRT

Variable RR interval

Fixed RR interval

Atrial fibrillation
Atrial tachycardia
C Visible P waves
with variable
ventricular
response
MAT
1:1 relationship
More P waves
between P waves
than R waves
and R waves
Atrial tachycardia
Atrial flutter

D Long
Atrial tachycardia
PJRT
Inappropriate sinus
tachycardia
Sinus reentry
Atypical AVNRT

No visible
P waves

Evaluate RP interval

E Short

RP interval
"70 ms

RP interval
!70 ms

AVRT
AVNRT
Atrial tachycardia

AVNRT

