Nausea and vomiting are common and distressing symptoms that may result from various underlying causes. Nausea is subjective and is commonly described as a sensation that precedes vomiting. Vomiting is a physical event that results in the rapid, forceful ejection of intestinal contents in retrograde fashion from the stomach via the mouth. Nausea and vomiting should be differentiated from other symptoms such as regurgitation, rumination, and bulimia. Regurgitation is a passive act by which food is brought back into the mouth without the abdominal and diaphragmatic muscular activity that characterizes vomiting. Acid regurgitation, for instance, is an important symptom of gastroesophageal reflux. However, rumination is defined as chewing and swallowing of regurgitated food that has come back into the mouth through a voluntary increase in abdominal pressure within minutes of eating or during eating. Rumination is commonly described among children with mental retardation and those with psychiatric illnesses, but now it is clear that it can occur in adults in the absence of either of these entities.

A. The differential diagnosis of nausea and vomiting is extensive. Therefore, a careful and orderly approach to the evaluation and treatment of patients with nausea and vomiting is needed for cost-effectiveness and to come to a correct diagnosis. When the patient is first seen, the acuteness of the problem should be determined. If there is concern for mechanical obstruction, peritonitis, or perforation, the patient will need to be hospitalized. The patient may require treatment for dehydration and electrolyte abnormalities. Could this be a self-limited viral gastroenteritis? A detailed history may give a clue to an offending medication. Timing and description of vomiting may also give a clue to the diagnosis. Vomiting in the morning is typically related to pregnancy, uremia, alcohol ingestion, or increased intracranial pressure. The quality of vomiting may also be helpful. A feculent odor to the vomitus is a feature of intestinal obstruction suggestive of bacterial degradation of stagnant intestinal contents. Associated symptoms such as abdominal pain, fever, diarrhea, or vertigo or a history of similar illness among family and friends may suggest the correct diagnosis. Abdominal pain preceding vomiting usually is suggestive of an obstructive process. Weight loss may indicate a malignant process, although a benign process such as gastric outlet obstruction from peptic ulcer disease may also cause weight loss. The presence of CNS symptoms such as headache, vertigo, neck stiffness, and focal neurologic deficits suggests a central nervous cause of nausea and vomiting. A history of intermittent episodes of vomiting associated with a history of migraine suggests cyclic vomiting syndrome. Postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) may complicate 11%-73% of surgical procedures. PONV is more common in women and younger patients and is more likely to occur after general anesthesia.
B. Orthostatic blood pressures should be obtained to evaluate for significant hypotension. A decrease in blood pressure without any change in pulse rate suggests the presence of autonomic neuropathy. General examination may detect jaundice, lymphadenopathy, and occult blood in stool and features that may suggest thyrotoxicosis or Addison's disease. Nausea and vomiting may result in malnutrition and various deficiency states. Examination of the abdomen is important. One should look for masses, abdominal distention, visible peristalsis, and abdominal or inguinal hernias. Assessing for specific areas of abdominal tenderness is also important. Presence of a succussion splash helps identify gastric outlet obstruction or gastroparesis. Extremities should be examined for changes suggesting scleroderma or peripheral neuropathy. Fingernails should be inspected for findings suggestive of self-induced vomiting. Loss of dental enamel may indicate either recurrent vomiting as in bulimia or the consequence of gastroesophageal reflux disease. Neurologic examination is also important, although it is often omitted. Examination of cranial nerves, funduscopic examination, and observation of the patient's gait should be done. In addition, emetic injuries to the esophagus and stomach can also result from vomiting. Vomiting can lead to Mallory-Weiss lacerations and upper GI bleeding. Deeper lacerations in the esophagus can lead to free perforation (Boerhaave's syndrome). Chronic vomiting can lead to dental erosions and caries. Purpura can appear after prolonged vomiting. These are pinhead-sized red macules on the face and upper neck (“mask phenomenon”). These eruptions are probably related to suddenly increased intrathoracic pressure. Nausea and vomiting may occur in congestive heart failure from passive congestion of the liver and gut.
C. Basic laboratory tests include a CBC, ESR, electrolytes, and standard chemistry profiles. In women of childbearing age, a pregnancy test must be done. Screening for thyroid function should be done. Metabolic causes of nausea and vomiting include uremia, diabetic ketoacidosis, hyperparathyroidism, and hypoparathyroidism. Serum drug levels may indicate toxicity in patients taking digoxin, theophylline, salicylates, and many other drugs. Hyponatremia on initial blood tests may be a result of Addison's disease. Metabolic derangements can also result from vomiting. Hypokalemia results from loss of potassium in the vomitus and most importantly from renal wasting from secondary hyperaldosteronism. Alkalosis also develops from loss of hydrogen ions in the vomitus, shift of extracellular hydrogen ions into cells caused by cellular potassium deficiency, and secondary hyperaldosteronism. If the clinical presentation is suggestive of mechanical obstruction, upright and supine abdominal x-rays should be obtained.
D. Recent studies suggest that CT scanning may be the technique of choice for the detection and localization of intestinal obstruction. In addition, it may also identify abdominal masses and pancreatic, hepatobiliary, or retroperitoneal pathology. Small bowel follow-through (SBFT) is accurate in the presence of high-grade obstruction but may fail to detect low-grade obstruction and smaller mucosal lesions.
E. All medications (both prescription and over the counter), dietary supplements, potential toxin ingestions, and environmental toxic exposures should be considered as possible etiologies.
F. Any condition associated with increased intracranial pressure can produce vomiting, with or without associated nausea, by activation of the brainstem structures mediating vomiting. Pregnancy is the most common endocrinologic cause of emesis, occurring in approximately 70% of women during the first trimester.
G. Focal lesions involving the brainstem and posterior fossa may cause and present as nausea and vomiting, as may seizure disorders and migraine. Cyclic vomiting, also referred to as “abdominal migraine,” is a rare syndrome. It is characterized by discrete episodes of nausea and vomiting with asymptomatic periods in between and is often associated with migraine headaches and motion sickness. Mean age of onset is 5 years, and it demonstrates a female predominance. Cyclic vomiting has recently been reported among adults and is postulated to result from disordered pituitary prostaglandin release.
H. Electrogastrography (EGG) is performed by placing electrodes over the abdominal skin and recording the frequency and regularity of gastric myoelectrical activity in the fasting state and after a test meal. Gastric dysrhythmias have been observed in patients with idiopathic and diabetic gastroparesis, nausea of pregnancy, and motion sickness. Gastric dysrhythmias have been recorded on occasion in those with unexplained nausea and vomiting in the absence of altered gastric emptying. MRI of the brain should be considered also in those with chronic unexplained nausea and vomiting. Once common organic causes and GI dysmotility have been excluded, consider psychogenic vomiting as a possibility.