NECK PAIN

Approximately 10% of the adult population complains of
neck pain at some time. Unlike back pain, fewer patients require time away from work or claim disability, and very few
develop permanent deficits. The cervical spine is composed
of seven vertebrae that are supported by the cervical and
trapezius muscles. In addition to supporting and providing
movement for the head and neck, the seven vertebrae also
serve to protect the spinal cord and spinal nerves whenever
the spinal column is at risk for injury. This may explain why
cervical strain is so common.
A. Neck pain is typically described at the base of the cervical spine or along the upper border of the trapezius
muscle. This may be accompanied by headache. Physical
or emotional stressors, poor sleeping habits, or poor
posture can cause this pain. Some patients will also
describe neck stiffness with lack of full neck motion. In
older patients this might be a result of osteoarthritis of
the cervical spine. Some patients develop numbness,
tingling, or pain down an arm. This may be a result of
disk herniation, especially at the level of C5-C6,
producing pain in the shoulder tip and trapezius and
radiating toward the anterior upper arm, radial forearm,
and thumb. Lateral disk herniation at C6-C7 produces
pain at the shoulder blade, pectoral area, and medial
axilla with radiation toward the posterolateral upper
arm, dorsal elbow and forearm, and palmar surface of
the thumb and index finger. There may also be sensory
impairment such as numbness or dysesthesia in these
areas. Lateral herniation between C7 and T1 produces
pain at the medial side of the forearm and sensory loss
in the medial forearm and the ulnar nerve distribution
of the hand. Central disk herniation at any cervical level
can produce a syndrome of cervical myelopathy with
bilateral long track signs in the extremities, gait dysfunction, and loss of coordination. In some of these patients
neck pain may be minimal or even absent.
Whiplash injury is the term used to describe cervical strain in the setting of an acute flexion/extension

520

injury, often seen in car accidents involving rear-end
collisions. Symptoms may include severe pain, spasm,
and loss of motion in the neck and occipital headache.
B. The examiner should observe the movement of
the head and neck, including rotation, lateral
flexion, forward flexion, and extension. Palpation of
the paraspinal and upper trapezius muscles can be
performed to assess for tenderness and muscle
spasm. Examination of motor strength and deep
tendon reflexes and sensory findings in the arms and
legs should be performed. The loss or asymmetry
of upper extremity reflexes may identify the location
of a disk herniation. However, deep tendon hyperreflexia in the upper or lower extremities might
suggest spinal cord compression.
C. Imaging studies should be considered in patients who
have severe, unrelenting pain that is not improving or
presenting with abnormal peripheral nerve function.
Plain films may document evidence for osteoarthritis,
and in patients with acute injuries, they could identify an
occult fracture. MRI and CT may be useful in identifying patients with disk herniations who might benefit
from targeted epidural steroid injections or require
referral to a surgeon. In most situations, MRI is preferred because it is more sensitive than CT in detecting
disk herniations, tumor, infection, or fracture.
Electromyography (EMG) should be considered
only for those patients who continue to have persistent
pain and whose imaging studies have not been helpful
in identifying the source of the pain.

References
Alexander MP. Whiplash: chronic pain and cognitive symptoms. Neurology
2003;60:733.
Stiell IG, Clement CM, McKnight RD, et al. The Canadian C-spine rule
versus the NEXUS low-risk criteria in patients with trauma. N Engl J
Med 2003;349:2510.

521
Patient with NECK PAIN

A History

Trauma
Onset of pain
Neurologic symptoms
Features of inflammatory
arthritis

B Physical examination

Neurologic findings
Localization of painful areas

C Imaging

Plain radiographs
(Include anteroposterior,
lateral, oblique,
flexion-extension, and
open-mouth views
of odontoid)

MRI or CT
Electromyography
Laboratory tests:
ESR or C-reactive protein
in patients with suspected
inflammatory arthritis
or infection

