Infection during episodes of chemotherapy-induced neutropenia is the most common cause of treatment-related mortality in patients with cancer. Most infections originate in the alimentary tract, sinuses, lungs, and skin. The risk of infection in a patient with neutropenia primarily is dictated by the severity and duration of neutropenia. The lower the absolute granulocyte nadir and the more prolonged the neutropenia, the greater the risk of serious infection. Fever is common in patients with cancer and may have many causes, including infection, the tumor itself, inflammation, transfusion of blood products, and chemotherapeutic and antimicrobial drugs. In patients with neutropenia, however, fever (a single temperature ≥38.3° C orally or ≥38° C over at least 1 hour) usually is secondary to infection, especially if the patient has <500 granulocytes/µl.

A. In addition to identifying localizing symptoms, the medical history should focus on special immunologic circumstances or defects that may predispose the patient to opportunistic infections. For example, patients with Hodgkin's disease are at increased risk for herpes zoster and cryptococcal meningitis; those who have undergone bone marrow transplantation are at risk for severe interstitial pneumonia with cytomegalovirus (CMV) or respiratory syncytial virus (RSV); and those taking high-dose steroids are at increased risk for pneumocystis pneumonia and fungal infections. Steroid use may further hide the signs and symptoms of infection, masking the seriousness of the clinical presentation. For instance, delirium may be the only manifestation of a serious infection in a patient receiving high-dose steroids.
B. A thorough physical examination must include careful auscultation of the lungs and meticulous evaluation of the integument, oral cavity, genitalia, and perianal region. Evaluation of the entire integument should focus especially on sites of vascular access and previous invasive procedures as potential portals for infection. The characteristic signs and symptoms of infections may be absent in patients with neutropenia who are unable to mount an adequate inflammatory response.
C. In addition to routine blood tests, culture blood from two separate sites, culture urine, and order a chest radiograph. Perform other tests such as stool culture, lumbar puncture, abdominal radiography, and bronchoscopy only if clinically indicated. For instance, in patients with diarrhea, culture for bacteria, ova, and parasite and perform a toxic screen for Clostridium difficile. Even with a comprehensive evaluation, a specific pathogen is initially identified in only 30%-50% of patients. With profound neutropenia (<100 cells/µl), bacteremias can be documented in only 15%-20% of febrile episodes.