NEUTROPHILIA


Increases in the number of circulating WBCs may represent either a primary disorder of WBC production or,
more commonly, a secondary response to an underlying
disease. Leukocytosis is defined by age-adjusted population normal values. Abnormal elevations in mature neutrophil count (neutrophilia) represent the most common
cause of leukocytosis and are the subject of this decision
matrix.
A. Neutrophilia is best defined as an increase in the absolute blood neutrophil count to a level !2 standard
deviations above the mean value for normal adult individuals. From a practical standpoint, this is usually
defined as a neutrophil count !10,000/mm3. Neutrophil counts follow a diurnal variation, with the peak
counts occurring late in the afternoon. However, this
variation is not enough to produce neutrophilia.
B. Initially, laboratory error should be excluded as a cause
of neutrophilia. With the advent of electronic complete
blood counting, error has been virtually eliminated.
Blood counts that do not make sense in a given clinical
context should be repeated. There is no substitute to
evaluating the peripheral blood smear. Factitious neutrophilia may result from preanalytic variables such as a
blood sample obtained with inadequate anticoagulant.
C. The evaluation of neutrophilia begins with a thorough
history and physical examination to search for an underlying disease state. Neutrophilia commonly results from
an acute or chronic inflammatory process. A bone
marrow examination rarely provides useful information
except in those patients in whom a primary marrow
dyscrasia is suspected. Bone marrow biopsy with culture
may be useful in the detection of chronic infections
(fungal or mycobacterial). In patients with very mild
neutrophilia, remember that the neutrophil count in
2.5% of the general population must be !2 standard
deviations above the mean. The regulation of the neutrophil count is also genetically controlled, and examination of siblings and family members can be helpful in
difficult cases.
D. The workup of neutrophilia is greatly simplified when
it can be classified as primary or secondary. In normal
individuals the neutrophil count varies directly with
the serum cortisol level, with both levels peaking in the
late afternoon. Neutrophil counts increase slightly after meals, with postural changes, and with stress and
emotional stimuli. These physiologic changes are not

240

enough to cause a clinically meaningful increase in the
neutrophil count.
E. Primary neutrophilia is that without evidence of an associated disease and may result from a wide variety of
bone marrow disorders. These can be idiopathic, familial, or malignant. Benign hematologic disorders, including rebound from agranulocytosis, megaloblastic anemia, or chronic idiopathic leukocytosis, can produce
chronic neutrophilia. Malignant hematologic disorders
such as chronic myeloid leukemia and myeloproliferative disorders must also be considered as other causes
of persistent primary neutrophilia.
F. Secondary neutrophilia may result from a wide variety
of stimuli. Both physical and emotional stimuli may
cause neutrophilia. These stimuli may include cold,
heat, exercise, seizures, pain, labor, surgery, panic, and
rage. Localized and systemic bacterial and mycotic
infections may result in secondary neutrophilia. Ongoing tissue necrosis with the activation of the complement system is responsible for increases in neutrophil
count. Finally, colony-stimulating factors such as filgrastim, sargramostim, and pegylated filgrastim can elicit a
striking neutrophilia. Mild chronic neutrophilia most
often is the result of smoking. Long-standing chronic
inflammation can also produce puzzling cases of secondary chronic neutrophilia. Vasculitis, rheumatoid arthritis, gout, myositis, colitis, dermatitis, periodontal disease, and drug reactions are often associated with
chronic neutrophilia. Nonhematologic malignancy can
produce chronic neutrophilia; causes commonly include
carcinomas of the lung, stomach, breast, kidney, pancreas, and uterus. Neutrophilia in response to drug
administration is rare except in the case of the administration of glucocorticoids, epinephrine, and lithium salts.
Specific therapy to reduce only the neutrophil counts is
not recommended. Instead, treatment of the underlying
cause is preferred.

References
Hoffbrand AV, Catovsky D, Tuddenham EGD. Postgraduate Hematology.
Oxford: Blackwell, 2005:277.
Hoffman R, Benz EJ, Shattill SJ, et al., eds. Hematology: Basic Principles
and Practice, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier/Churchill Livingstone,
2005:802.
Lichtman MA, Beutler E, Kipps TJ, et al., eds. Williams Hematology, 7th
ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2006:907.

241
Patient with NEUTROPHILIA

A Satisfy diagnostic criteria
B Exclude laboratory error
Peripheral blood smear

C History

Physical examination

D Determine whether neutrophilia
is primary or secondary

E Primary
Consider:
Hereditary neutrophilia
Chronic idiopathic neutrophilia
Chronic myeloid leukemia
Myeloproliferative disorders
Leukemoid reaction
Familial cold urticaria
Leukocyte adhesion deficiency

F Secondary
Consider:
Infection
Stress
Chronic inflammation
Nonhematologic malignancy
Drug-induced
Asplenia
Generalized marrow stimulation

