NIPPLE DISCHARGE


A. Although nipple discharge is more commonly associated with benign than malignant lesions, cancer needs
to be ruled out as the cause. As an initial step a careful
medical history and examination is of paramount importance. To be significant, any type of nipple discharge should be true, spontaneous, persistent, and
nonlactational. Question the patient for any medication, recent pregnancy, and evidence of amenorrhea.
Pharmaceuticals that can cause galactorrhea include
estrogens, phenothiazines, opiates, tricyclic antidepressants, dopamine antagonists, and many others by
different mechanisms.
There are seven basic types of nipple discharge.
Milky, multicolored, and purulent secretions are treated
medically except for an abscess concomitant with a purulent discharge that requires surgical drainage. The remaining four types are yellow or serous, pink or serosanguineous, bloody or sanguineous, and clear or watery.
These four types can be the result of cancer and often
require surgery to obtain tissue for histologic study.
B. It is important to differentiate between galactorrheal
and nongalactorrheal discharge. Galactorrhea may occur bilaterally or unilaterally. Secretions may be thick
or thin, or pure white or close to colorless, or they may
have a grayish or greenish hue. Fat stain is highly sensitive for determining presence of milk. Galactorrhea
usually is of hormonal or pharmacologic origin. Measure serum prolactin and thyroid-stimulating hormone
(TSH) in all patients with galactorrhea. If prolactin is
elevated, obtain an MRI to determine whether the
patient has a pituitary mass. If the prolactin and TSH
are normal, follow the patient yearly or as indicated
clinically. Human growth hormone (GH) binds to and
activates prolactin receptors and GH receptors. Thus,
galactorrhea may be an early sign of acromegaly. If
clinically warranted, obtain a GH measurement. If the
TSH is high, evaluate the patient for hypothyroidism.
Patients with galactorrhea caused by hypothyroidism
may have normal, high normal, or moderately elevated
concentrations of prolactin. The majority of women
with galactorrhea do not have an underlying, pathologic cause. At least half of women who have ever lactated can have galactorrhea at some time in their lives.
Moreover, women who manipulate their breasts, or
whose partners do so, can also experience galactorrhea. When galactorrhea is bilateral, a neoplastic process is particularly unlikely. Therefore, galactorrhea

604

rarely requires treatment, unless an underlying cause
is identified.
C. In patients with nongalactorrheal discharge, first perform a careful and thorough breast examination. Palpation of a mass requires immediate and complete
evaluation to rule out a malignant process. If no mass
is palpable, consider cytology and mammography. Although a mass usually is present when the discharge
is caused by cancer, there is no palpable mass in 13%
of cancers with nipple secretions. Do not rely solely
on the cytology of the discharge. There is a reported
18% false-negative rate and 2.6% false-positive rate
with standard cytology alone. Mammography has a
9.5% false-negative rate and 1.6% false-positive rate
for detecting cancer in patients with a nipple discharge. The ability of soft-tissue mammography to
identify and localize intraductal papillomas is limited.
A number of authors have suggested that galactography (a contrast mammogram obtained by injecting a
radiopaque dye into the discharging duct) is the diagnostic procedure of choice for nipple discharge. It is
better than soft-tissue mammography in its ability to
visualize and localize small intraductal papillomas.
However, its ability to differentiate benign from malignant lesions is limited, and it is a time-consuming
procedure that can be uncomfortable to the patients.
Because diagnostic tests are not 100% accurate, surgically significant discharges should be evaluated with
biopsy and histologic tissue examinations. Although
rare, a watery discharge must be considered with concern. There is an increasing likelihood of cancer when
the discharge is (in order of increasing frequency) serous, serosanguineous, sanguineous, or watery; when it
is accompanied by a lump; when there are adverse
cytologic and mammographic findings; and when the
patient is !50 years of age.

References
Dickey, Richard P. Drugs that affect the breast and lactation. Clin Obstet
Gynecol 1975;18:95.
Fiorica JV, James V. Nipple discharge. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am
1994;21:453.
Gulay H, Bora S, Kilicturgay S, et al. Management of nipple discharge.
J Am Coll Surg 1994;178:471.
Haney AF. Galactorrhea. In Bardin CW, ed. Current Therapy in Endocrinology and Metabolism, ed 6. St. Louis: Mosby, 1997:393.
Leis HP Jr. Management of nipple discharge. World J Surg 1989;13:736.

605
Patient with NIPPLE DISCHARGE

A History with emphasis
on medication

Fat stain

C Nongalactorrheal

B Galactorrhea

discharge

Consider:
Cytology

Prolactin
TSH

Normal

Normal prolactin
Abnormal TSH

Follow by yearly
measurements
of prolactin
Consider GH level
if indicated

Normal TSH
Prolactin elevated

No mass

Mass present

Mammography

Tissue diagnosis
Consider mammogram
before biopsy

MRI

Treat as indicated

Macroadenoma
(prolactin usually
!200 ng/ml;
associated with
sexual dysfunction
in men, menstrual
abnormalities in
women)

Negative findings

Positive findings

Consider surgical
evaluation if
high likelihood of
malignancy

Surgical Evaluation
and Biopsy

Microadenoma
or
Nonsecretory
pituitary adenoma
(prolactin usually
"100 ng/ml)

