NONCARDIAC CHEST PAIN

A. Chest pain causes anxiety because of the possibility of
cardiac disease. Coronary disease should be excluded
before investigating esophageal causes of chest pain.
Although microvascular angina is possible with normal
coronary arteries, it is not common. More than 600,000
patients a year undergo cardiac catheterization, and
one third have normal coronary arteries. Thus,
!150,000 patients per year may require evaluation for
noncardiac chest pain. Esophageal disorders may cause
cardiac-type chest pain in up to 50% of these patients.
Associated symptoms of dysphagia, odynophagia, or
heartburn are suggestive of an esophageal source but
are often absent.
B. Endoscopy is often used initially to exclude structural
or mucosal abnormalities such as erosive esophagitis,
esophageal strictures/tumors, achalasia, hiatal hernia,
and gastric ulcers. Although the diagnostic yield is low,
this can be an important test for excluding complicated
esophageal disease.
C. Of patients with normal coronary arteries and cardiac
chest pain, 35%–50% have gastroesophageal reflux
disease (GERD). This may or may not be manifested
by erosive esophagitis. Therefore, a normal endoscopic
result does not exclude reflux, and reflux may cause
cardiac-type chest pain without symptoms of dysphagia
or heartburn. In addition, acid perfusion of the esophagus not only lowers the threshold for myocardial ischemia but may induce this condition. The most sensitive
test for documenting GERD is ambulatory pH monitoring, which allows correlation of chest pain events
with reflux events. Another commonly used “diagnostic” test is a 2- to 4-week therapeutic trial with a proton
pump inhibitor (omeprazole or lansoprazole) at a high
dosage. Resolution of chest pain implies that it was
caused by acid (e.g., reflux); appropriate therapy can
then be prescribed, although the accuracy of this test
has recently been questioned. An etiologic association
can be assumed if cardiac-type chest pain is temporally
related to reflux. Unfortunately, pH monitoring is not
widely available.
D. Motility disorders of the esophagus account for cardiac-type chest pain in 5%–38% of patients evaluated
in noncardiac chest pain series. Manometry measures
the pressure and function of the lower esophageal
sphincter and the motility of the esophageal body.
Most motility abnormalities are intermittent and may
be missed during manometry. In addition, the motility

182

abnormality rarely is accompanied by chest pain during the study. High-pressure peristaltic contractions
(nutcracker esophagus) are the most common motility
disorder diagnosed in patients with chest pain (up to
30%), followed by nonspecific motility disorders
(20%–30%), diffuse esophageal spasm (5%–10%), and
achalasia (2%–3%). Unless chest pain occurs with the
observed motility disturbance, causation cannot be
assumed.
E. If motility testing is nonspecific or nondiagnostic,
provocative testing may be done. Provocative testing is
based on the hypothesis that the esophagus is hypersensitive to normal or physiologic stimuli and that
chest pain is simply an altered or heightened perception of these stimuli. Most patients with noncardiac
chest pain have personality traits similar to those of
patients with irritable bowel syndrome (i.e., they are
anxious, depressed, hypochondriacal, and neurotic),
and one third meet diagnostic criteria for panic disorder. Provocative tests include perfusing the distal
esophagus with acid (Bernstein test), intravenous infusion of a cholinergic agent (Tensilar), or inflation of a
balloon in the esophagus (balloon distention). Reproduction of cardiac-type pain is considered diagnostic of
an esophageal source of the pain.

References
Browning TH. Diagnosis of chest pain of esophageal origin: a guideline
of the Patient Care Committee of the American Gastrointestinal
Organization. Dig Dis Sci 1990;35:289.
Cannon RO, Cattau LE, Yokshe PN, et al. Coronary flow reserve,
esophageal motility, and chest pain in patients with angiographically
normal coronary arteries. Am J Med 1990;88:217.
Just RJ, Castell DO. Chest pain of undetermined origin. Gastrointest
Endosc Clin N Am 1994;4:731.
Katz PO, Dalton CB, Richter JE, et al. Esophageal testing of patients with
noncardiac chest pain or dysphagia: results of three years’ experience
with 1161 patients. Ann Intern Med 1987;106:593.
Lieberman D. Noncardiac chest pain: there’s often an esophageal cause.
Postgrad Med 1989;86:207.
Numans ME, Lau J, de Wit NJ, et al. Short-term treatment with
proton-pump inhibitors as a test for gastroesophageal reflux disease: a
meta-analysis of diagnostic test characteristics. Ann Intern Med
2004;140:518–527.
Richter JE, Bradley LA, Castell DO. Esophageal chest pain: current
controversies in pathogenesis, diagnosis and therapy. Ann Intern Med
1989;100:66.
Voskuil JH, Cramer MJ, Breumelhof R, et al. Prevalence of esophageal
disorders in patients with chest pain newly referred to the cardiologist.
Chest 1996;109:1210.

183
Patient with NONCARDIAC CHEST PAIN
(Chest Pain with Normal Coronary Arteries)

A History

Physical examination
Trial of Double Dose of
Proton Pump Inhibitor
bid #14 Days

No response

B

Structural or
mucosal
abnormality

C 24-hr pH monitoring

Normal pH

Treat Accordingly

pH "4 but
no correlation
with chest
pain

D Manometry

Normal study
or
nonspecific
motility disorder
Provocative Testing:
Bernstein
Tensilar
Balloon Distention

Normal

Chest pain

Esophageal
cause of
chest pain
unlikely

Esophageal
cause of
chest pain
likely

Reassure
patient

Treat
Accordingly

Consider Trial of a
Tricyclic Antidepressant

Endoscopy

Normal

Esophageal cause
of chest pain likely

E

Response

Diffuse esophageal
spasm
Achalasia
Nutcracker
esophagus
Esophageal
cause of
chest pain
likely
Treat Accordingly

Possible
esophageal
(GERD) cause
of chest pain
Empiric Trial
of Treatment
for GERD

Chest pain
correlating
with pH "4
Esophageal
(GERD) cause
of chest pain

Treat for GERD

