OSTEOPOROSIS AND OSTEOPENIA

A. The initial evaluation for osteoporosis begins with a
careful history and physical examination for risk factors
for bone loss. Patients at risk for osteoporosis include
postmenopausal women !65 years, postmenopausal
women of any age with additional risk factors (personal
history of fracture as an adult, fracture in a first-degree
relative, current smoker, use of steroids, more than two
alcoholic drinks per day, low weight, menopause before
age 45, recent falls, low physical activity, lifelong low
calcium intake, impaired vision, dementia), men and
premenopausal women with low-impact fractures, and
anyone with known secondary causes of osteoporosis.
Patients in any of these categories should obtain a bone
mineral density (BMD) scan.
B. Bone density scans measure a given individual’s bone
mass. The World Health Organization (WHO) defines
osteopenia as a T score (standard deviations below or
above the mean for young adults) of "#1.0 but
!#2.5. Osteoporosis is defined as a T score $#2.5.
C. Lifestyle interventions should be recommended to all
patients who have osteoporosis or osteopenia. These
include calcium supplements of 1200–1500 mg daily,
vitamin D supplementation of 800 IU daily, weightbearing exercise, smoking cessation, and limiting
alcohol intake to no more than two drinks per day.
D. Initial laboratory evaluation for patients with osteoporosis and osteopenia should include a calcium, albumin,
phosphorus, and alkaline phosphatase test to assess for
possible hyperparathyroidism, osteomalacia, or other
calcium and phosphate disorders. Renal function should
be assessed with a BUN and creatinine, and a thyroidstimulating hormone (TSH) test should be ordered to
exclude hyperthyroidism. A 25-OH vitamin D level
should be ordered to assess for possible vitamin D
deficiency. In men with osteoporosis, a total testosterone level should be measured.
E. Renal insufficiency can cause low BMD. The etiology
is multifactorial and includes secondary hyperparathyroidism from low 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D levels.
F. Vitamin D deficiency may contribute to bone loss.
Vitamin D deficiency is defined as levels "15 ng/ml.

630

G.

H.

I.

J.

The goal vitamin D level for optimal bone health
is !30 ng/ml.
Hyperthyroidism increases bone turnover and, as a
result, decreases bone mass. Studies have demonstrated
that even subclinical hyperthyroidism (specifically when
the TSH is "0.1 mU/L) can place patients at increased
risk for osteoporosis.
If calcium is increased and/or phosphorus is decreased,
the patient may have hyperparathyroidism. If this
pattern is seen, an intact parathyroid hormone (iPTH),
calcium, albumin, and phosphorus level should be
drawn simultaneously to assess for this possibility.
If the patient has a Z score (standard deviations above
or below the mean for age-matched controls) that is
"#2.0, a thorough evaluation for secondary causes of
osteoporosis should be performed. This additional
testing may include a serum protein electrophoresis
(SPEP), urine protein electrophoresis (UPEP) to exclude multiple myeloma, iPTH to definitively exclude
hyperparathyroidism, 24-hour urine calcium and creatinine to evaluate for hypercalciuria, and overnight
dexamethasone suppression test to assess for Cushing’s
syndrome.
Treatment of osteoporosis and osteopenia should be
focused on treating the underlying secondary cause, if
present, and appropriate calcium and vitamin D intake. Other therapies that should be considered include bisphosphonates (oral or IV) and raloxifene. For
patients with very severe osteoporosis, PTH injections
should be considered. All patients should have repeat
BMD scans in 1–2 years to assess effectiveness of
treatment.

References
Kanis JA, Borgstrom F, De Laet C, et al. Assessment of fracture risk.
Osteoporos Int 2005;16:581.
Khosla S, Melton LJM. Osteopenia. N Engl J Med 2007;356:2293.
National Osteoporosis Foundation. Physician’s guide to prevention and
treatment of osteoporosis. www.nof.org/physguide/index.htm. 2003.
Raisz LG. Screening for osteoporosis. N Engl J Med 2005;353:164.

631
Patient with OSTEOPOROSIS/OSTEOPENIA

A History, physical examination
B Bone mineral density scan
Osteopenia or osteoporosis

C Lifestyle interventions

Laboratory test
results normal;
Z score !#2.0

E Renal

disease

D Laboratory evaluation

F Vitamin D

deficiency

G Hyperthyroidism ↑ Calcium

and/or
↓ phosphorus

H iPTH

Consider bisphosphonates
if T score "#1.5
Reassess risk factors yearly
Repeat BMD scan in 2 yr

J Treatment

Repeat BMD scan in 1–2 yr
to assess treatment effect

Laboratory test
results normal
Z score "2.0

I Additional

evaluation
for secondary
causes

