PALPABLE PURPURA


Palpable purpura is a skin lesion that is purpuric and has
substance. It can be a papule, vesicle, or pustule. These
lesions are highly indicative of inflammatory destruction of
cutaneous blood vessel walls (vasculitis). Immune-mediated
mechanisms of damage often are operative. Many clinically
distinct disorders fall under the general heading of vasculitis,
but the pathologic processes are similar in most of them.
A. The presence of palpable purpura is considered septic
vasculitis until proved otherwise. Therefore, rule out
underlying causes of sepsis before doing any other
workup. Signs and symptoms of sepsis include fever,
chills, mental status changes, tachycardia, tachypnea,
and hypotension. In this clinical setting, several blood
cultures and a skin biopsy of a purpuric lesion for light
microscopy, bacterial smear, and culture are indicated.
B. Although there are few distinguishing clinical features
of the skin lesions in septic vasculitis that would lead to
the diagnosis of a specific infection, there occasionally
are clues. In staphylococcal sepsis, showers of purpuric
pustules appear. Gram stain reveals the offending organism. In gonococcemia, there are relatively few acral
purpuric papules and vesicles that subsequently develop into pustules. Patients with meningococcemia
have an explosive onset of hundreds of hemorrhagic
macules and papules over the whole body. In Rocky
Mountain spotted fever, palpable purpuric lesions
occur after several days of illness, and only after the
lesions have progressed from pink macules to red
papules to purpuric papules.
C. In many cases, palpable purpura of the skin mirrors
systemic vasculitides, most of which are immune mediated. Although laboratory abnormalities are common
in systemic vasculitis, there are few abnormalities
pathognomonic for given diseases. Therefore, the
workup includes measurements of organ function and
immune status along with the history and physical
examination.
D. Henoch-Schönlein purpura is a small vessel vasculitis,
usually occurring in children, that involves the skin (palpable purpura), joints, kidneys, and GI tract. In 90% of
cases this follows an upper respiratory infection and lasts
for 7–14 days. There may be recurrences. Several chronic
disorders are characterized by granuloma formation involving blood vessels that can produce palpable purpuric
lesions. Wegener’s granulomatosis is a disease involving

122

the skin, kidneys, and upper respiratory tract. Allergic
granulomatosis (Churg-Strauss syndrome) occurs in
asthmatic patients who develop palpable purpura, hypertension, chronic pneumonitis, and a neuropathy. Polyarteritis nodosa is a vasculitis of small- and medium-sized
arteries with involvement of the skin, kidneys, pulmonary and nervous system, and joints. The skin lesions
may be purpuric papules, subcutaneous nodules, and/or
cutaneous ulcerations along with livedo reticularis. Urticarial vasculitis is a multisystem disorder with recurrent
crops of purpuric wheals lasting several days. Some of
these patients have associated hypocomplementemia.
This is differentiated from other forms of vasculitis by
the relatively evanescent nature of the lesions and by
the fact that the lesions appear more urticarial.
E. In many cases, palpable purpura (vasculitis) occurs in
an otherwise clinically healthy patient. A limited laboratory workup, including skin biopsy, is indicated to
rule out occult immune complex diseases such as essential mixed cryoglobulinemia and hyperglobulinemic
purpura, and purely cutaneous vasculitides such as
erythema elevatum diutinum.
F. Hypersensitivity vasculitis does not have pathognomonic criteria but depends on a constellation of signs
and symptoms. Most patients are !16 years of age and
may have a history of intake of a medication that could
be causative. They have palpable purpura and nonblanching red papules and macules, usually on the
lower extremities.

References
Bolognia J, Jorizza J, Rapine R. Dermatology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier,
2007.
Calabrese LH, Michel BA, Bloch DA, et al. The American College of
Rheumatology 1990 criteria for the classification of hypersensitivity
vasculitis. Arthritis Rheum 1990;33:1108.
Lightfoot RW Jr, Michel BA, Bloch DA, et al. The American College
of Rheumatology 1990 criteria for the classification of polyarteritis
nodosa. Arthritis Rheum 1990;33:1088.
Manders SM. Serious and life-threatening drug eruptions. Am Fam
Physician 1995;51:1805.
Mills JA, Michel BA, Bloch DA, et al. The American College of Rheumatology 1990 criteria for the classification of Henoch-Schönlein purpura.
Arthritis Rheum 1990;33:1114.
Tapson KM. Henoch-Schönlein purpura. Am Fam Physician 1993;47:633.
Wolff K, Goldsmith LA, Katz SI, et al. Fitzpatrick’s Dermatology in General Medicine, 7th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2007.

123
Patient with PALPABLE PURPURA
History
Physical examination

Systemic signs/symptoms

History of foreign protein or
blood transfusion
Serum sickness

A Signs of sepsis

C Systemic signs without sepsis

Blood Cultures
Skin Biopsy

Hemogram
Urinalysis
Stool Guaiac
Sedimentation Rate
ANA
Rheumatoid Factor
Serum Complement
Serum Protein Electrophoresis
Chest Radiograph
Skin Biopsy

B Consider:

Streptococcal infection
Staphylococcal sepsis
Gonococcemia
Meningococcemia
Rickettsial disease
Viral infection

D Consider:

Henoch-Schönlein purpura
Granulomatous vasculitis
Giant cell arteritis
Polyarteritis nodosa
Urticarial vasculitis
Carcinoma
Inflammatory bowel disease

E Cutaneous signs only
Hemogram
Chemistry Screen
Serum Cryoglobulins
Serum Complement
Skin Biopsy

F Consider:

Hypersensitivity vasculitis
Essential cryoglobulinemia
Hyperglobulinemic purpura
Erythema elevatum diutinum
Idiopathic cutaneous vasculitis

