PALPITATIONS


Palpitations are a common complaint. Although usually
benign, they are occasionally a life-threatening condition.
A stepwise approach is helpful in avoiding unnecessary
workup yet still identifying patients at high risk.
A. The initial evaluation in all patients should include
a directed history and physical examination and a
12-lead ECG. The initial history should be directed
toward identifying patients at high risk for having a
malignant etiology of their palpitations. This group includes those with prior myocardial infarction, especially with structural heart disease with an ejection
fraction (EF) of !40% and congestive heart failure;
those with palpitations associated with syncope; and
patients with a family history of myopathy or sudden
cardiac death. The patient’s description of symptoms
can be helpful in suggesting a diagnosis. A “flip-flopping” of the heart, especially when lying quietly in bed,
suggests ventricular premature contractions (VPCs).
Rapid irregular heartbeats suggest atrial fibrillation. A
sensation of pounding in the chest suggests atrioventricular (AV) dissociation and is most often seen in AV
nodal reentrant tachycardia (AVNRT).
Palpitations in the setting of anxiety are often misdiagnosed as being psychiatric in origin, especially in
young women. This diagnosis should not be accepted
until true arrhythmic causes have been excluded.
The 12-lead ECG can be helpful in certain circumstances: a short PR interval and delta waves suggest
Wolf-Parkinson-White syndrome, marked left ventricular hypertrophy with deep septal Q waves in I, aVL, and
V4-6 suggests hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; left atrial
abnormalities are often seen in patients with atrial
fibrillation; abnormal Q waves suggest prior MI leading
to monomorphic ventricular tachycardia (VT); and a long
QT interval can be seen in polymorphic VT.
B. If the patient does not have any high-risk features and
the palpitations are not particularly bothersome, then
reassurance can be offered. Otherwise, ambulatory
cardiac monitoring should be performed using a
patient-activated continuous loop monitor for up to
2 weeks or until a diagnosis is made. This approach is

78

C.

D.
E.

F.

more cost-effective than using a Holter monitor, which
is less likely to capture a significant event as a result of
its shorter monitoring period.
If isolated ventricular or atrial ectopy is identified as
the source of palpitations, then withdrawal of potential
precipitants such as caffeine or alcohol is often helpful.
Reassurance is often the best therapy; however, if the
patient remains highly symptomatic, then a trial of
beta blockade is reasonable.
Management of atrial fibrillation and flutter should
focus on rate vs. rhythm control and stroke prevention
with anticoagulation.
Sustained supraventricular tachycardia, when identified, are often amenable to curative therapy with an
ablation. This is especially true of AVNRT, AV reentrant trachycardia (AVRT), atrial flutter, and increasingly atrial fibrillation. This option should be offered
to patients whose symptoms are especially frequent
or highly symptomatic, especially if associated with
syncope or near-syncope.
Patients with sustained ventricular tachycardia or with
high-risk features—family history of sudden cardiac
death, or structural heart disease (EF !40%)—should
be referred to an electrophysiologist for appropriate
management, including possible electrophysiology
study (EPS), antiarrhythmic therapy, and implantable
cardiac defibrillator (ICD) implantation.

References
Josephson ME, Wellens HJJ. Differential diagnosis of supraventricular
tachycardia. Cardiol Clin 1990;8:411–442.
Kennedy HL, Sprague MK, Kennedy LJ, et al. Long-term follow-up of
asymptomatic healthy subjects with frequent and complex ventricular
ectopy. N Engl J Med 1985;312:193–197.
Lessmeier TJ, Gamperling D, Johnson-Liddon V, et al. Unrecognized
paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia: potential for misdiagnosis as
panic disorder. Arch Intern Med 1997;157:536–543.
Mayou R, Sprigings D, Birkhead J, Price J. Characteristics of patients
presenting to a cardiac clinic with palpitation. QJM 2003;96(2):115–123.
Zimetbaum PJ, Kim KY, Josephson ME, et al. Diagnostic yield and optimal duration of continuous-loop event monitoring for the diagnosis
of palpitations: a cost-effectiveness analysis. Ann Intern Med
1998;128(11):890–895.

79
Patient with PALPITATIONS

A History

12-lead ECG

Physical examination

Infrequent
Minimally symptomatic
Low-risk profile

High-risk profile
or ECG
Syncope

Frequent
Highly symptomatic

B Reassure

Transthoracic
echocardiography

No further testing
necessary

B Patient-activated

No structural
heart disease

loop recorder

Isolated VPCs

Sustained
supraventricular

C Reassure

Trial of beta blockade

D Atrial fibrillation or flutter

Anticoagulate if indicated
Treat for rhythm or rate control
Consider referral for ablation

Any cardiomyopathy
Left ventricular
EF ! 40%

Sustained
ventricular

F Referral to

electrophysiologist for:
EPS " ICD "
antiarrhythmic
therapy

E AVNRT, AVRT, atrial tachycardia

Reassure
Educate on abortive measures
such as Valsalva
Consider referral for ablation

