PARKINSON’S DISEASE


Parkinson’s disease (PD) was first described by James
Parkinson in “An Essay on the Shaking Palsy” in 1817.
Clinically, PD is now classically diagnosed as a triad of rest
tremor, bradykinesia/akinesia, and cogwheel rigidity. These
clinical findings result from degeneration of the dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta of the
midbrain. The histopathologic hallmark of PD is the Lewy
body. These neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions are typically
found in the midbrain.
A. The diagnosis of PD requires the presence of the
following symptoms: resting tremor, cogwheel rigidity,
bradykinesia/akinesia, and postural instability. In
addition to motor symptoms, patients may also have
cognitive impairment (see Chronic Behavior Change
chapter). The incidence increases with age, from 0.50
per 100,000 in the 30- to 39-year age range to 119.01
per 100,000 in the 80- to 89-year age range.
B. The decision to treat a patient with suspected idiopathic PD is based on several considerations, including
age. The first-line therapy, levodopa/carbidopa is preferred in older patients because of a lesser risk of cognitive side effects in this age group compared with the
dopamine agonists. The dopamine agonists are classified as ergot or nonergot alkaloids. The ergot compounds are bromocriptine and pergolide. Nonergot
agonists include ropinirole, pramipexole, and apomorphine. Pergolide, ropinirole, and pramipexole are frequently used to treat younger patients with PD. Bromocriptine, one of the oldest dopamine agonists, is now
rarely used to treat idiopathic PD. The agonists have a
higher incidence of hallucinations and somnolence. As
a class, they can also cause nausea and dyspepsia. Recently they have been linked to pathologic behavior
such as compulsive gambling. The incidence seems to
be dose-dependent, and a higher incidence has been
noted in patients being treated with pramipexole. Apomorphine was accepted as treatment for PD in the
United States in 2004. Because of its strong emetic effect, apomorphine requires premedication with domperidone, an antiemetic. It is administered subcutaneously, has a rapid onset (about 10 minutes), and can last
up to 2 hours. Pergolide, an ergot-derived agonist, has
been linked to valvular heart disease and to retroperitoneal and pleuropulmonary fibrosis.
C. Two medications may provide neuroprotective benefits
in PD. The DATATOP study suggested that selegiline, a
monoamine oxidase inhibitor, may exhibit neuroprotective effects. Similar benefit may be seen with high dosages (1200 mg/day) of coenzyme Q10. Some clinicians
442

add these medications to the treatment regimen with
the hope that they may provide neuroprotection.
D. As the disease progresses, higher doses of a levodopa/
carbidopa or a dopamine agonist are inevitably required.
Patients taking dopamine agonist monotherapy will eventually need levodopa/carbidopa for symptomatic relief.
For those patients already taking levodopa/carbidopa, entacapone (a COMT [catechol-O-methyltransferase] inhibitor) can be added to lengthen the half-life of the drug. If
levodopa/carbidopa begins losing effect (“wearing off”)
between doses, the dosing interval can be shortened.
A controlled-release form of levodopa/carbidopa is
often used at nighttime to help reduce symptoms in the
morning.
E. Dyskinesias are involuntary movements that can be seen
in patients with PD. Their varieties are described in relation to medication dose, usually in relation to peaks and
troughs of medication levels. For example, peak-dose
dyskinesias usually respond to a decrease in the dose; if
the patient is taking a COMT inhibitor, this should be
stopped. “Off” dyskinesias can be treated in several ways,
including shortening the dosing interval, increasing the
dose of levodopa/carbidopa, or adding entacapone.
F. Surgical therapies for PD are another modality of
comprehensive therapy for some patients. Deep brain
stimulation (DBS) of the subthalamic nucleus is typically
reserved for refractory tremor and severe dyskinesia.
Extensive evaluation is required prior to the surgery to
ensure correct diagnosis and to document the neurologic
examination before and after medications. Psychiatric
screening is required. Generally, the benefit from DBS is
only as good as the patient’s best response to medication
(“on” time). In most cases, DBS may enable a reduction
but not an elimination of dopaminergic therapy.
References
DATATOP. A decade of neuroprotective therapy. Parkinson study group.
Deprenyl and Tocopherol Antioxidant Therapy of Parkinsonism. Ann
Neurol 1998;44(3 suppl 1):S160–166.
Driver-Dunckley E, Samanta J, Stacy M. Pathological gambling associated
with dopamine agonist therapy in PD. Neurology 2003;61(3):422–423.
Lang AE, Widner H. Deep brain stimulation for Parkinson’s disease:
patient selection and evaluation. Mov Disord 2002;17(Suppl 3):
S94–101.
Parkinson Study Group. Effects of coenzyme Q10 in early Parkinson
disease: evidence of slowing of the functional decline. Arch Neurol
2002;59(10):1541–1550.
Van Camp G, Flamez A, Cosyns B, et al. Treatment of Parkinson’s disease
with pergolide and relation to restrictive valvular heart disease. Lancet
2004;363(9416):1179–1183.
Van Den Eden SK, Tanner CM, Bernstein AL, et al. Incidence of Parkinson’s disease: variation by age, gender and race/ethnicity. Am J Epidemiol 2003;157:1015–1122.

443
Patient with SYMPTOMS OF PARKINSONISM

A

History
Physical examination

Use of neuroleptics,
alpha-methyldopa,
amoxapine, metoclopramide
Drug-induced parkinsonism
Stop drugs
if possible

Additional
findings

Give Levodopa

B

Specific findings
indicate type of
secondary PD

No response

Response

Striatonigral
degeneration

Idiopathic (primary) PD

C

D

Protective
therapy

Symptoms causing
disability or
embarrassment

Selegiline

Sufficient response

E

Sufficient response

Patient young
or mildly affected

Patient old or more
severely affected

Direct Dopaminergic
Agonists

Levodopa/
Carbidopa

Some help

No help

Add
Entacapone

Discontinue Drug
Add Amantadine

Sufficient
response

F

Some help

Discontinue
and Add
Dopamine
Agonists

Add
Dopamine
Agonists

Some help

No help

Add Controlled-Release
Levodopa/Carbidopa

Discontinue Drug
Add Controlled-Release
Levodopa/Carbidopa

Adjust peak dose effect

Sufficient response

Symptoms continue

Side effects

Adjust dosing interval

Increase Individual
Dose

Decrease Individual
Dose

No worsening of symptoms
before or at time of next dose

Symptoms worsen before
or at time of next dose

Initial response to
controlled-release levodopa/
carbidopa too slow

Shorten dosage interval

Add Regular Levodopa/Carbidopa
Compound to First AM Dose of
Controlled-Release Levodopa/
Carbidopa

No help

