A. Plain radiography provides most of the information about the underlying lesion and directs future decision making. Technetium-labeled methylene diphosphonate bone scanning is a sensitive indicator of multiple skeletal involvement, except in myeloma, in which little reactive bone is formed. The skeleton is the third most common site of metastasis from adenocarcinoma; skeletal metastases are present in 70% of patients. Diffuse loss of mineral homogeneity throughout the skeleton suggests osteoporosis; osteomalacia; or marrow replacement by leukemia, lymphoma, or myeloma.
B. Of carcinomatous metastases, 90% are solitary, especially those of neuroblastoma and hypernephroma. A solitary bone lesion in a patient >40 years of age is most likely metastasis, whereas it may be a primary bone tumor in a patient <40 years of age.
C. The primary tumor is found in only one third of patients with skeletal metastases; most of those diagnoses have breast or prostate primaries. Undetected primaries are most likely lung or kidney. The recommended diagnostic strategy is history; physical examination; routine laboratory studies; chest radiography; mammography (in women); urinalysis; and ultrasound, CT, or MRI of the kidneys. Additional tests detect primaries in only a few patients.
D. In most cases, tissue diagnosis does not alter surgical therapy, but it may if the lesion is a primary bone tumor or if the metastatic lesion can justifiably be resected, as in hypernephroma, thyroid carcinoma, plasmacytoma, or melanoma. Resection of a solitary hypernephroma metastasis may result in a 30% 5-year survival rate.
E. Patients with metastatic disease have a 2-year average life expectancy; the life expectancy is 6 months for lung metastasis. Restoring the structural integrity of the bone or joint improves function and quality of life. Internal fixation can be supplemented with polymethyl-methacrylate (PMMA) cement for immediate stability, and prosthetic replacement can be used even in the young. Treat impending fractures with prophylactic fixation when the lesion is painful, when the lesion is >2.5 cm in diameter, or when the cortex is destroyed >50% across the diameter of the bone on a uniplanar radiograph. Treat shafts of the femur, humerus, tibia, and subtrochanteric femur with intramedullary nail or consider an intercalary metal spacer in selected patients. Use cemented prosthetic replacement for fractures of the femoral neck, distal femoral condyles, proximal tibia, and acetabulum. Percutaneous injection of PMMA into lytic acetabular metastases has been tried in selected patients, although such defects have traditionally been reconstructed using cement-reinforced rods anchored in the surrounding intact ilium. Fractures of the pelvis other than the acetabulum are treated nonsurgically. Radiotherapy follows fracture stabilization.
F. External beam radiotherapy is used to treat other areas that do not require stabilization and fractures or lesions involving the spine, ribs, or nonarticular pelvis. Systemic treatments for metastatic bone disease include chemotherapy, endocrine therapy, and bisphosphonates. Response to bisphosphonates in osteolytic metastases can be assessed by detecting lower bone type I collagen breakdown products, such as N-telopeptide, as measured in serum or urine. Tamoxifen is used in postmenopausal women who have estrogen-positive breast tumors; sometimes tamoxifen is followed by aromatase inhibitors. Men with metastatic prostate cancer are often treated with bilateral orchiectomy and androgen blockade with leuprolide LHRH-A, flutamide, goserelin acetate, or cyproterone acetate. Site-directed radiotherapy using samarium-153, strontium-89, and rhenium-186 has more effectively relieved pain in prostate lesions than in breast lesions. Bisphosphonates treat hypercalcemia, inhibit osteolysis, relieve pain in 50% of patients, and show healing in 25% of patients with breast cancer.
G. The differential diagnosis of a fractured solitary bone lesion is listed in the algorithm. Localized osteopenia from failure to use a limb can occur with pain, reflex sympathetic dystrophy, previous cast immobilization, and paralytic conditions. Fractures often are seen in previously irradiated bone and in Paget's disease. The latter is distinguished from prostatic carcinoma by enlargement of the involved bone and coarsened, rather than destroyed, trabeculation.
H. Benign primary bone tumors often have intact cortex, distinct margins, and solid homogeneous periosteal reactions. Malignant tumors show destruction of cortex, indistinct margins, and lamellated or sunburst periosteal reactions.
I. Cast treatment without biopsy is justified for a benign bone tumor having a diagnostic radiographic appearance and self-healing behavior (e.g., unicameral bone cyst, metaphyseal fibrous cortical defect, eosinophilic granuloma, enchondroma, fibrous dysplasia). Biopsy is indicated when the diagnosis is uncertain or when the lesions are unlikely to heal without resection or curettement and grafting (e.g., aneurysmal bone cysts, giant cell tumor, chondromyxoid fibroma, osteoblastoma, chondroblastoma). A cast may be used for healing of the cortex before definitive treatment. Steroid instillation is effective in obliterating unicameral bone cysts if cast immobilization of a fracture is unsuccessful.
J. Before biopsy, order an MRI to determine the extent of marrow and soft-tissue involvement in primary malignant tumors of bone; cortical destruction is better seen on CT. A fracture through a primary bone sarcoma most often necessitates amputation. However, if the cortical fracture is small and displacement is minimal, the patient may still be a candidate for resection and limb salvage, especially if preoperative adjuvant chemotherapy is administered. Treat chondrosarcomas with surgery alone.
K. Both metastatic and metabolic disease may involve the spine, proximal femurs, and ribs. Osteoporosis characteristically results in fractures of the distal radius and femoral neck. Osteomalacia more commonly affects the subtrochanteric femur and successive ribs at the same distance from the spine; 30% of patients with hip fractures have osteomalacia. Osteomalacia, marked by excess of unmineralized osteoid, can be of vitamin D deficiency, poor absorption of calcium or vitamin D enterically, vitamin D-resistant form, or renal osteodystrophy. Osteoporosis can be idiopathic (the type 1 postmenopausal variety is a loss of trabecular more than cortical bone; the type 2 senile variety is an equal loss of both), can result from disuse or immobilization, or can be secondary. The most common causes of secondary osteoporosis in otherwise-healthy males are hypogonadism, steroid use, and alcoholism, and in females are hypercalciuria, malabsorption, hyperparathyroidism, vitamin D deficiency, and too much replacement thyroid hormone. Most of these known causes of osteoporosis in females can be diagnosed by obtaining levels of serum calcium; parathyroid hormone (PTH); 24-hour urine calcium; thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH); and, if necessary, a 1,25-OH vitamin D3. For males, a dexamethasone suppression test and a serum testosterone level can be obtained. Densitometry should be done on men >70 years of age with a fracture or women >50 years of age with a fracture or younger of either gender with risk factors, including weight <127 pounds, small build, menopause before age 45, smoking, alcohol use, steroid use, history of prior fracture, or positive family history. Consider treatment when dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry is <2.0 standard deviations below normal or <1.5 standard deviations below normal if the patient has a fragility fracture or risk factors. Treat the patient with calcium and vitamin D in sufficient doses (currently recommended 1200 mg calcium in two to three divided doses QD and vitamin D at 1000 international units or QD). Calcium carbonate can be used unless the patient has constipation or indigestion, in which case use calcium citrate. Begin bisphosphonates, such as alendronate, risedronate, or ibandronate, 2–6 weeks after fracture and use for as long as 5 years, stopping temporarily if the N-telopeptide decreases to a low level or if another fracture occurs while receiving treatment. PTH can be substituted during fracture healing, or PTH can be used instead when bisphosphonates are ineffective, or if the N-telopeptide is low in low-turnover osteoporosis, or in young females of childbearing age. Hormone replacement with estrogen in postmenopausal women is no longer recommended because of the risk of coronary artery disease, phlebitis, pulmonary embolism, and breast cancer. Raloxifene, a selective estrogen receptor modulator, is effective in reducing spine fractures, but not hip fractures, and reduces the risk of breast cancer and coronary artery disease. Calcitonin, administered as a nasal spray, also has not been shown to protect the hip from future fractures, although it has diminished spine fracture risk and has an analgesic effect on patients with osteoporotic vertebral fractures.
L. Most patients with metastatic disease to the spine are treated with radiotherapy alone with 60%-80% improvement, but those who have worsening pain, deformity that may lead to neurologic compromise, or new onset of neurologic deficits are evaluated for structural integrity and possible surgery. CT is best to demonstrate the degree of bone loss or presence of bone fragments in the canal, and MRI is used to determine the extent of involvement of adjacent vertebrae and sagittal deformity. Spinal instability is felt to be present if one of the following is found: bone loss in both the anterior and posterior elements, excessive kyphosis in sagittal alignment, or increased motion when lateral radiographs in flexion and extension are compared. Tumor in the body of the vertebrae with displacement of the posterior cortex into the spinal canal is decompressed with an anterior approach to the spine. Destruction of the pedicles and lamina with compression from the posterior side is decompressed from a posterior approach. The spine is then stabilized with internal fixation anteriorly, posteriorly, or circumferentially, followed by radiotherapy. The vertebral body may need to be replaced with metal, structural bone graft, or a cage containing osteobiologic material. Acute onset of paraparesis is treated with emergency radiotherapy without the need for surgery when the bone is structurally intact and the MRI shows tumor tissue extending into the spinal canal.
M. Osteoporotic vertebral compression fractures are likely to become increasingly common as the population ages and as vitamin D deficiency becomes more common. Of women with hip fractures, 50% have been found to have vitamin D deficiency. Two thirds of acute osteoporotic vertebral fractures are never seen by a physician because the elderly consider the back pain and dysfunction part of the aging process. Most acute pain can be treated with analgesics, decreased activity, or a brace. Occasionally patients have intractable pain, postulated to result from recurrent microfractures related to kyphotic posture, and, very rarely, neurologic deficits requiring surgical treatment.
N. Minimally invasive procedures for the relief of pain in metastasis or osteoporosis of the spine are being studied when the posterior cortex of the vertebrae is intact. When there is no deformity or when the fracture can be reduced posturally, a biomaterial or PMMA in low-viscosity state may be injected percutaneously under pressure into the vertebral body (vertebroplasty). When there is deformity or instability, a percutaneously placed balloon is first inflated to restore vertebral height (kyphoplasty) prior to injecting a higher-viscosity PMMA under lower pressure. Pulmonary embolism and the risk of cement extravasation with consequent neurologic dysfunction are rare but of concern.

