PERIPHERAL NEUROPATHY


Peripheral neuropathies can affect peripheral sensory, motor, and autonomic nerves and on occasion the cranial nerves.
Diagnosis is challenging because of the multiplicity of peripheral neuropathies. Thus, it is essential to perform a detailed
history and examination to narrow the differential diagnosis.
A. In taking a detailed history, consider the following
questions. What systems are involved? Are the symptoms mainly sensory, motor, or a combination of both?
Is there an autonomic neuropathy (e.g., orthostatic
hypotension, impaired sweating, constipation, diarrhea, impotence, gastroparesis)? Sensory nerve fibers
are commonly involved, but this may be a result of
large- or small-fiber dysfunction. Patients with a smallfiber neuropathy present with severe neuropathic pain.
Complaints of positive phenomena (e.g., burning,
prickling, tingling) are useful in differentiating hereditary from acquired forms of peripheral neuropathy.
Patients with hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy
(HMSN) generally do not have positive symptoms. In
addition, patients whose main complaint is severe
incoordination and ataxia from loss of proprioception
typically have loss of the sensory nerve ganglion,
known as ganglionopathy or neuronopathy. What was
the temporal nature of the neuropathy in terms of
onset and progression? Neuropathies may be acute
(evolution over hours to 1 month), subacute (evolution
over 1–2 months), or chronic (progression over
2 months) in onset, and the subsequent course can be
monophasic, relapsing-remitting, stable, or slowly or
rapidly progressive. It is important to inquire into past
medical history, medications, illicit drug use, toxic exposures, and family history. Primary systemic disorders
(e.g., diabetes mellitus, HIV infection, cancer) can
cause peripheral neuropathy and may be the presenting manifestation of the disease. Patients should be
asked about their work to see if they are exposed to
toxins. Also, risk factors for HIV infection should be
explored, particularly in patients with otherwise unexplained peripheral neuropathy. A detailed family history is essential to address whether the neuropathy is
hereditary or acquired. Some family members may be
only very mildly affected, so a family history is not
always apparent to the patient or other family members. Electrophysiologic studies of family members
may clarify this.
B. What is the pattern of motor and sensory involvement?
Is it symmetric or asymmetric? Is weakness proximal
and/or distal? Is the face or trunk affected? Axonal neuropathies manifest in a length-dependent manner, so
444

the distal territories of the longest nerves are the most
severely and initially affected. As a result, a symmetric
stocking-glove distribution of symptoms and signs is
seen. If the arms are more involved than the legs, or the
proximal extremities are more affected than distal
extremities, this suggests a demyelinating neuropathy or
ganglionopathy, which is not length dependent. If there
is proximal weakness with no or minimal sensory symptoms, this should raise the concern of a myopathy,
neuromuscular junction defect, or spinal muscular atrophy instead of a peripheral neuropathy. Nevertheless,
severe proximal weakness can be seen in certain types of
peripheral neuropathy. Also, although distal weakness is
most often seen in peripheral neuropathies, a few
myopathies can present with significant distal weakness
(distal muscular dystrophy, myotonic dystrophy, and inclusion body myositis). Additionally, myasthenia gravis
can also rarely present with distal weakness. The different sensory modalities (pain, touch, temperature, vibration, and proprioception) should be assessed in all
patients. Large-diameter sensory nerves mainly convey
deep touch and proprioception, whereas temperature
and pain are conveyed by small-diameter nerve fibers.
Vibratory perception is carried by both large- and smalldiameter nerve fibers. Small-diameter nerve fibers are
preferentially affected in some neuropathies (e.g., amyloid neuropathy), whereas other neuropathies have
a predilection for larger fibers (e.g., chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy [CIDP]). In
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), myopathy, or myasthenia gravis, the sensory examination should be normal
unless the patient has a concurrent neuropathy. Detailed motor strength testing elucidates the distribution
of muscle weakness and atrophy. Muscles should be
inspected for evidence of abnormal movements (e.g.,
fasciculations, myokymia), which are seen in certain
neuropathic conditions (e.g., ALS, radiation plexopathy). Muscle tone is usually normal or diminished in a
peripheral neuropathy, whereas spastic tone is suggestive of ALS. Ankle jerks are usually lost relatively early
on in axonal neuropathies. If upper extremity reflexes
are lost or there is a generalized early areflexia, this is
suggestive of a demyelinating process or ganglionopathy. Upper motor neuron signs such as pathologically
brisk reflexes and extensor plantar responses are not
seen in peripheral neuropathies unless there is additional CNS dysfunction, as in ALS. Patients should be
asked to walk on their heels and toes because this can
unmask subtle distal leg weakness. Asking the patient to
stand with feet together and eyes closed assesses the

445
Patient with PERIPHERAL NEUROPATHY

A History

Physical examination

B Asymmetric

B Symmetric motor
and sensory

Motor only
Distal
Diabetes
Cryptogenic
Metabolic
Vitamin deficiency
Toxic
Medication
HMSN

Proximal
and distal

C Electrophysiologic
examination

Motor and
sensory

ALS
MMN

Autonomic
AIDP
CIDP
AIDP
AMAN
HIV
Amyloid
neuropathy
Vincristine
Porphyria
Pandysautonomia

Distal
(mononeuropathy
multiplex)
PAN
RA
Churg-Strauss
syndrome
Wegener’s
granulomatosis
Leprosy
Lyme disease
Sarcoidosis
CIDP
HNPP

Proximal and distal
Diabetic amyotrophy
Brachial plexitis
Leptomeningeal
metastases
Postradiation
plexopathy
Sensory ataxia
Sjögren’s syndrome
Paraneoplastic neuropathy
Pyridoxine toxicity
Cisplatin
HIV
Idiopathic

AIDP, Acute idiopathic demyelinating polyneuropathy; AMAN, acute motor axonal neuropathy; HNPP, hereditary neuropathy with
liability to pressure palsies; MMN, multifocal motor neuropathy; PAN, polyarteritis nodosa; RA, rheumatoid arthritis.

function of the large-diameter sensory neurons and the
posterior columns, which are abnormal in ganglionopathy or a spinocerebellar degeneration (Romberg’s sign
will be present in these disorders).
C. The electrophysiologic evaluation involves electromyography (EMG) and nerve conduction studies (NCS).
These studies are often essential in the evaluation of
peripheral neuropathies, can illuminate patterns that
are consistent with particular families of disorders, and
will often essentially rule out other disorders. A consultation with a neurologist can be valuable in planning
the approach to electrodiagnostic testing.

References
Adams RD, Victor M, Ropper AH. Principles of Neurology, 6th ed.
New York: McGraw-Hill, 1996.
Amato AA, Zwarts MJ, Dumitru D. Electrodiagnostic Medicine, 2nd ed.
Philadelphia: Hanley and Belfus, 2001.
Barohn RJ. Approach to peripheral neuropathy and neuronopathy. Semin
Neurol 1998;18:7–18.
Dyck PJ, Thomas PK, eds. Peripheral Neuropathy, 4th ed. Philadelphia:
WB Saunders, 2005.
Logigian EL, Herrmann DN. Approach to and classification of peripheral
neuropathy. In Samuels MA, Feske SK, eds. Office Practice of Neurology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone, 2003:569–575.
Wolfe GI, Baker NS, Amato AA, et al. Chronic cryptogenic sensory polyneuropathy: clinical and laboratory characteristics. Arch Neurol
1999;56:540–547.

