PIGMENTED LESIONS


Skin color is determined mainly by the amount and distribution of melanin, a pigmented polymer produced by
melanocytes. Hyperpigmentation is almost always the result of either production of too much melanin or abnormal
distribution of pigment, although heavy metals or drug metabolites can change skin color.
A. Dermal melanosis/melanocytosis refers to a group of
pigmentary skin conditions in which an increased
number of melanocytes are producing melanin within
the deeper levels of the dermis. The skin overlying
these pigmented cells appears slate-blue to bluishblack. Mongolian spots are bluish macules presenting
at or near birth that occur in 95% of black and 10% of
white newborns. Of these lesions, 75% occur over the
sacrum. They may be single or multiple and may be as
large as 10 cm. They generally disappear by 5 years of
age. Nevus of Ota is a form of dermal melanocytosis
involving the distribution of the fifth cranial nerve. It
is more common in Asians and also occurs in blacks.
It is present at birth in 60% of those affected. Skin
color is blue-gray to blue-brown. The sclera of the eye
may also be involved.
B. Blue nevi are localized benign proliferations of melanocytes. They may be congenital or acquired. There
are two types. Common blue nevi range in size from
2–10 mm. They present as small round to oval, smoothsurfaced, well-defined papules with a bluish-black
pigmentation. Cellular blue nevi are less common and
tend to be !1 cm. They are also bluish-black and may
be mistaken for nodular melanoma. Rarely, cellular
blue nevi can undergo malignant transformation.
C. When pigment derived from melanocytes is concentrated
in the epidermis, the resulting skin color may range from
tan to brown or even black. Freckles are an example of
localized areas of increased pigment production caused
by a normal concentration of melanocytes. They appear
as small (2–5 mm) tan to brown macules on sun-exposed
areas of skin and arise by age 2–4 years. They can be
clinically differentiated from lentigos (“liver spots”) or
nevi by the fact that they darken with sun exposure in the
summer and fade in the winter. Café-au-lait spots present
at birth as well-marginated tan macules. Six or more lesions !1.5 cm in diameter are diagnostic of neurofibromatosis (NF). In these patients, take a history for any
personal or family history of NF. In patients suspected of
having NF, do a slit-lamp examination of their eyes to look
for Lisch nodules, which are pathognomonic for NF and
are present in all cases by age 5. Lentigos are welldemarcated tan to brown macules that may occur on
112

any part of the skin, but particularly on sun-exposed
areas of the face and dorsum of the hands. Unlike
freckles, they do not fade over time. They are caused
by an increased number of melanocytes with increased
pigment production at the dermal-epidermal (DE)
junction. Most lentigos are "5 mm. When lentigos are
!5 mm and have irregular borders, perform a biopsy
to determine whether the lesion is a lentigo maligna
(LM). LMs are a form of melanoma in situ that can
progress to invasive melanoma if not treated in time. If
an LM is suspected, perform an incisional biopsy.
D. Congenital nevi are present from birth and range from
2 mm to !20 cm in diameter. They are typically deeply
pigmented brown to black papules or plaques that may
have verrucous surfaces and associated thick dark
hairs. Giant congenital nevi (GCN) may involve an
entire extremity or even large sections of the torso,
scalp, or face. The risk of melanoma occurring in a
GCN is estimated to be 5%. Although small and medium congenital nevi are associated with melanoma,
the incidence of malignant transformation is far less
than with GCNs; however, they should be followed
with photographs and biopsied or excised if changes
are seen.
E. Common acquired nevi (moles) appear during the first
three decades of life and begin to regress after age 65.
The average person has 40 nevi. Acquired nevi are divided into three categories depending on the localization of their melanocytes. In junctional nevi the melanocytes are present at the DE junction. These lesions
are smooth-bordered macules "5 mm with uniform
color ranging from light to dark brown or even black.
Compound nevi are raised well-demarcated symmetric
papules or thin plaques. They range from light to dark
brown; some have a stippled appearance. Melanocytes
are present at the DE junction and within the dermis.
Dermal nevi present as flesh-colored or pink papules.
All melanocytes are found within dermis. Compound
nevi may progress to dermal nevi as the melanocytes
lose their ability to produce pigment and melanocytes
are lost from the DE junction.
F. A number of acquired pigmented lesions can mimic
nevi. The most common of these are seborrheic keratoses (SKs) and dermatofibromas. SKs usually occur after
age 35 and are well-defined, verrucous, usually hyperpigmented papules or plaques without surrounding pigment incontinence. They may become irritated by clothing or trauma, in which case they may show signs of
inflammation or pruritus and require removal by cryotherapy, curettage, or shave excision. Occasionally, SKs
(Continued on page 114)

113
Patient with PIGMENTED LESIONS
History
Physical examination

Localized
hyperpigmentation

A Blue color
Congenital

C Tan to brown or black color

Congenital

Acquired

Consider:
Mongolian spot
Nevus of Ota
B Blue nevus

B Consider:

Consider:
Café-au-lait
spot
D Congenital
nevus

Blue nevus

Irregular
pimentation

Widespread
hyperpigmentation

Acquired
Cont’d on p 115
Consider:
Freckle
Lentigo
E Common
acquired nevus
F SK
Dermatofibroma

Cont’d on p 115

114
may be misdiagnosed as melanomas because of their
dark color, and at times, melanomas may masquerade as
SKs. When there is any doubt, a biopsy is indicated.
Dermatofibromas are smooth, brown or pink papules
that often pucker in the center when compressed from
the edges (the “dimple sign” of Fitzpatrick). Although
their cause is unclear, they may arise after minor trauma
such as an insect bite or razor cut. Becker’s nevus is a
uniformly tan to brown plaque that occurs primarily on
the upper trunk and shoulders. It is more common in
males than in females. These lesions usually present in
adolescents and may be confused with large congenital
nevi as they mature and acquire coarse dark hairs. They
are a form of connective tissue nevus and present no
malignant potential.
G. Dysplastic or atypical nevi are acquired nevi that are
!5 mm in diameter and have irregular or variegate
pigmentation (blues, browns, black, red, or white) with
poorly defined or irregular borders. Some of these lesions may be precursors for melanomas. Patients with
atypical nevi who have two or more first-degree relatives with dysplastic nevi and a history of melanoma
have nearly a 100% chance of developing melanomas.
Follow these patients carefully for any signs of change
in their nevi. These changes can best be assessed when
baseline high-quality photographs have been taken so
that the current findings can be compared with previous images.
H. Melanomas are skin cancers arising from the malignant transformation of melanocytes. As discussed, they
may arise from precursor lesions such as atypical nevi,
congenital nevi, and LM. They may also arise de novo
from melanocytes within the skin. Suspect melanoma
if a pigmented lesion displays any combination of
asymmetry, border irregularity, variegate colors, or a
diameter !5 mm. Other worrisome signs are pruritus,
ulceration, bleeding, or change in color or size of the
lesion.
I. Melasma is a form of hyperpigmentation characterized by mottled tan to brown macules coalescing
into irregular patches on the face. The forehead,

cheeks, and upper lip are often involved. Melasma
is common in pregnancy, and the condition may
also be triggered by oral contraceptive use. It may
be idiopathic or familial and can also be seen in
men. Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation is another form of localized macular hyperpigmentation
that occurs after cutaneous trauma or inflammatory
dermatoses. It is more common and may be more
severe in darker-skinned individuals.
J. Pigmentary abnormalities of the skin can have both
exogenous and endogenous causes. A number of medications can cause hyperpigmentation. Minocycline, if
given in sufficient quantities for prolonged periods,
can produce a gray-brown discoloration in old acne
scars or a pattern of more diffuse hyperpigmentation
over the anterior legs or trunk. Phenothiazines may
cause a blue-gray color, particularly in sun-exposed
skin. Hydroxychloroquine may produce irregular gray
patches on the legs. Patients taking amiodarone may
develop a slate-gray hyperpigmentation on the face,
particularly after long-term sun exposure. Exposure to
heavy metals such as gold or silver may result in a diffuse bluish-gray cast to the skin. Systemic disorders
such as Addison’s disease, uremia, and hemochromatosis can cause distinctive generalized patterns of hyperpigmentation.

References
Arndt KA, Leboit PE, Robinson JK, Wintroub BU, eds. Cutaneous
Medicine and Surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1996.
Bolognia J, Jorizza J, Rapine R. Dermatology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier,
2007.
Swerdlow AJ, English JS, Qiao Z. The risk of melanoma in patients with
congenital nevi: a cohort study. J Am Acad Dermatol 1995;32:595.
Tucker MA, Halpern A, Holly EA, et al. Clinically recognized dysplastic
nevi: a central risk factor for cutaneous melanoma. JAMA
1997;277:1439.
Wolff K, Goldsmith LA, Katz Sl, et al: Fitzpatrick’s Dermatology in General Medicine, 7th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2007.
Yohn J, Hoffman S, Norris D, Robinson W. Melanoma: diagnosis and
treatment. Hosp Pract (Off Ed) 1994;29:27.

115
Patient with PIGMENTED LESIONS
(Cont’d from p 113)

Localized
hyperpigmentation

Widespread
hyperpigmentation

Irregular
pigmentation

I Melasma

Consider:

J

G Dysplastic
nevus

H Melanoma
Excisional
Biopsy

Consider:

Postinflammatory
hyperpigmentation
Drug reaction

