PITUITARY TUMOR


A. Pituitary tumors present as incidentalomas following
radiographic imaging for another reason, as a result of
mass effect (typically visual impairment or headache),
or because evidence emerges for either hypofunction
or hyperfunction. Tumors can be divided into two
groups: Microadenomas are up to 10 mm in size, and
anything larger is classified as a macroadenoma. Tumors can be functional or nonfunctional. Clinicians
should consider imaging the pituitary in patients who
have hypothyroidism with a low or low-normal thyroidstimulating hormone (TSH) level, are anovulatory with
a low or low-normal follicle-stimulating hormone
(FSH) level, have erectile dysfunction, or have symptoms of hypogonadism with a low or normal luteinizing
hormone (LH) level.
B. Any patient with a recognized pituitary tumor should
be evaluated with a serum prolactin level. Patients with
a macroadenoma should be more carefully evaluated
with an assessment of their growth hormone (GH),
gonadotropin, thyrotropin, and corticotropin levels.
C. Pituitary hypofunction is suggested by low thyroxine
levels with a low TSH. Patients with thyroxine levels
below the normal range should be treated with exogenous levothyroxine. Patients with reduced gonadotropins should receive either androgens or estrogens as
appropriate. Progesterone replacement should be provided to women with an intact uterus. Estrogen replacement doses do not need to be as high as the doses
contained in the oral contraceptive pill. Patients with
central hypoadrenalism should be treated with oral
glucocorticoids; mineralocorticoid replacement is not
necessary in these patients. GH replacement in adults
with GH deficiency is controversial.
D. Clinicians should consider whether the pituitary tumor is an adenoma (most common), a meningioma, a
metastatic tumor, or a craniopharyngioma, each of
which has typical imaging characteristics. Other considerations are a physiologic pituitary enlargement
during pregnancy, a pituitary cyst or abscess (often
associated with a fluid level on imaging), arteriovenous fistula, or lymphocytic hypophysitis (a rare condition usually associated with late pregnancy and

158

E.

F.

G.

H.

associated with a high incidence of adrenal insufficiency and diabetes insipidus).
A serum prolactin level of !200 ng/ml is diagnostic of
a prolactinoma. Levels lower than this may be the result of a prolactinoma or any other sellar mass. Prolactin levels should be measured on a diluted sample if
the tumor is large and the prolactin level is low. Prolactinomas of any size are best treated with cabergoline or
bromocriptine, even when causing apoplexy.
Acromegaly is best excluded by measuring the level of
serum insulinlike growth factor (IGF)-1. When the
level is not diagnostic, GH levels can be measured
2 hours after a 75-g glucose load. Normally the level
should fall to "1 ng/ml. Patients with acromegaly
should be treated with transsphenoidal resection of the
tumor. Medical treatment with cabergoline or longacting somatostatin is first-line treatment for patients
who have failed surgery. A GH receptor antagonist
and/or radiotherapy may be useful when other medical
treatments and surgery have failed.
Elevated adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) levels
in the presence of Cushing’s syndrome suggest either
ectopic production of ACTH or Cushing’s disease. Inferior petrosal sinus sampling is often indicated to
confirm Cushing’s disease in such patients. Transsphenoidal resection is the best treatment for Cushing’s
disease. (See Cushing’s Syndrome.)
Nonfunctioning pituitary adenomas that are not causing mass effect or pituitary hypofunction can be monitored carefully with repeat imaging every 12 months.
Tumors causing mass effect or hypopituitarism should
be resected.

References
Aron DC, Howlett TA. Pituitary incidentalomas. Endocrinol Metab Clin
North Am 2000;29(1):205–221.
Chanson P, Salenave S. Diagnosis and treatment of pituitary adenomas.
Minerva Endocrinol 2004;29(4):241–275.
Kreutzer J, Fahlbusch R. Diagnosis and treatment of pituitary tumors.
Curr Opin Neurol 2004;17(6):693–703.
Verhelst J, Abs R. Hyperprolactinemia: pathophysiology and management. Treat Endocrinol 2003;2(1):23–32.

159
Patient with PITUITARY TUMOR

Mass effect

Syndrome

Incidental finding

A Pituitary tumor
confirmed

hyperfunction

E Prolactin

G ACTH

GH

cause (especially
if large)

hypofunction

H Nonfunctioning

F Measure

IGF-1,
postglucose
GH level
Measure
24-hr urinary
free cortisol

Any size

D Evaluation for

C Evaluation for

B Evaluation for

FSH/LH

TSH

ACTH

Arg-GHRH
stimulation
test

If inappropriately
low

If low, replace
thyroxine

250 $g ACTH
stimulation test

Replace GH
in some
circumstances

Diagnose
acromegaly
#1 cm

Cabergoline
or
Bromocriptine

GH

Female

Male

Estrogen/
progestin
if age #50 yr
Testosterone

Watch
Resect neurosurgically

Replace with
hydrocortisone

