PLEURAL EFFUSION

Many different clinical syndromes can result in accumulation of fluid in the pleural space. The most common causes
of pleural effusion in the United States are congestive heart
failure (CHF), pneumonia, and malignancy.
A. The differential diagnosis for the cause of a pleural
effusion is large. Although sampling of the fluid for
laboratory evaluation is necessary for diagnosis in most
cases, history can help guide the diagnosis. Previous
occupational and environmental exposures, travel
outside the United States, presence of fever/constitutional symptoms, history of viral illness, CHF, and recent trauma are but a few of the points to ascertain
during the interview.
B. Physical examination of the chest is characterized by
diminished or absent breath sounds during auscultation,
dullness to percussion, and decreased tactile fremitus.
There is often an area of egophony superior to the
effusion, reflecting adjacent atelectatic lung.
C. Conventional radiography is usually sufficient imaging
to identify the presence of a pleural effusion. Lateral
decubitus films can help to quantify the amount of
fluid and determine whether it is free-flowing versus
loculated. In some cases, ultrasound is required to localize and guide sampling of small fluid collections.
D. Thoracentesis is required in most cases to make a
diagnosis. Presence of a !10-mm-thick stripe on a lateral decubitus film confirms that there is sufficient fluid
to be obtained. The needle/catheter should be inserted
one or two interspaces below the level of the percussed
dullness, midway between the posterior-axillary line

490

E.

F.

G.

H.

and the spine. Insertion should take place over the rib
to avoid the neurovascular bundle that traverses the
inferior costal margin. If the patient has dyspnea, a
therapeutic thoracentesis should be performed. The
clinician should be careful, however, to remove no
more than 1500–1800 ml to avoid reexpansion pulmonary edema.
Pleural effusions fall into two broad categories based
on Light’s criteria: transudates and exudates. Light’s
criteria are fluid protein/serum protein !0.5, fluid
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)/serum LDH !0.6, and
fluid LDH more than two thirds the upper limit of
normal in the serum. Light’s criteria are most sensitive
for identifying exudates but have a lower specificity
than other criteria.
Transudates accumulate as a result of an imbalance
between hydrostatic and oncotic pressures in the pleural space. The leading causes of transudates are CHF
and cirrhosis. For transudative pleural effusions, initial
testing should be limited to total protein and LDH.
Once a transudate is established, further testing may be
misleading.
Exudates occur when local factors influencing the
accumulation of pleural fluid are altered. An exudate is
diagnosed when any one of Light’s criteria is met.
Further laboratory evaluation is warranted to specifically
diagnose the cause of the exudates.
The gross appearance of the fluid can be helpful
in specific situations: (1) hemothorax: grossly bloody,
(2) anaerobic infection: putrid odor/pus, and (3) chylothorax: milky-white.
(Continued on page 492)

491
Patient with PLEURAL EFFUSION

A History
B Physical examination
C Imaging

PA and lateral CXR
Consider decubitis film
Consider ultrasound

Suspect CHF or viral pleurisy

No or atypical progression

D Thoracentesis
E Light’s criteria

TPf / TPs !0.5
LDHf / LDHs !0.6
LDHpf !2/3 upper limit
of normal

F Transudate

CHF
Nephrotic syndrome
Cirrhosis
PE

G Exudate

H Examine for color and odor

Bloody — PE, trauma, malignancy
Putrid — anaerobic infection
Milky — chylothorax

Cont’d on p 493

Yes
Observation

492
I. pH should be measured on most diagnostic pleural fluid
samples. A pH "7.20 in the setting of an associated
pneumonia indicates an empyema that will require
chest tube placement/surgical drainage. Low pH can
also be seen in effusions from rheumatoid arthritis, lupus, or malignancy. Malignant effusions with low pH are
prognostic of low life expectancy. Glucose "60 mg/dl
also suggests the presence of an empyema or a malignant effusion. Other classic causes of low glucose include effusions secondary to tuberculosis and rheumatoid arthritis.
J. A cell count of !50,000 suggests the presence of
a complicated parapneumonic effusion/empyema.
Chronic exudates are more likely to have low cell
counts ("5000). Neutrophilic predominance suggests
an acute process, whereas a fluid monocytosis is more
likely in a chronic illness. Lymphocytosis in the pleural fluid is seen most commonly in lymphoma and tuberculosis. If mesothelial cells account for !5% of the
cells, tuberculosis is an unlikely diagnosis, although
not entirely ruled out.
K. Gram stain and culture of pleural fluid are done to
rule out the presence of infection and to identify a

specific organism. Inoculation of culture bottles at
the bedside increases the yield of the test.
L. Cytology can be helpful in both the diagnosis and
staging of malignancy. If lymphoma is suspected, flow
cytometry should also be analyzed.
M. Additional studies that can be useful in specific clinical
situations include triglyceride level (chylothorax) and
amylase (esophageal rupture, malignancy, pancreatitis).
N. In more than 25% of cases, even after thorough testing of sampled pleural fluid, the cause of the pleural
effusion remains an enigma. Observation versus more
invasive procedures should be guided by the patient’s
clinical presentation and the pretest probability of a
serious disease requiring treatment. In the latter
group, surgical referral for thoracoscopy and pleural
biopsy is warranted.

References
Light RW. Pleural effusion. N Engl J Med 2002;346:1971–1977.
Light RW. Pleural Diseases, 3rd ed. Baltimore: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins, 1995.

493
Patient with PLEURAL EFFUSION
(Cont’d from p 491)

I pH "7.20mg/dl or

glucose "60
Empyema
Complicated parapneumonic
effusion
Rheumatoid arthritis
Tuberculosis
Systemic lupus
erythematosus
Malignancy

M Other chemistry

K Concern for

abnormalities

infection

Gram stain
and culture

J Cell count and

L

differential

Primary lung
cancer—
stage IIIB

Elevated
Triglycerides
Total protein !8 g/dl
amylase
!110 mg/dl
Multiple myeloma
Pancreatitis Waldenström’s
Chylothorax
Malignancy
PseudomacroEsophageal
chylothorax
globulinemia
rupture
Cytology positive

Metastatic
disease

Lymphoma
Flow cytometry

Lymphocytes 85%– 95%
Tuberculosis
Lymphoma
Sarcoid
Rheumatoid arthritis
Chylothorax

Total cell count

!50,000
Empyema

Mononuclear cell predominant
Viral infection
Chronic causes

Eosinophils !10%
Pneumothorax
Hemothorax
Pulmonary infarction
"5000
Asbestosis
Parasitic disease
Fungal infection
Chronic
Drugs
exudate
Malignancy
Churg-Strauss
syndrome

HCT !50% peripheral HCT
Hemothorax

N All studies unrevealing

Observation
Pleural biopsy if recurrent

