A. A thorough history and physical examination are required for the evaluation of polyarthritis. Historical features of interest include duration of symptoms; prior episodes of arthritis; and distribution, presence, and duration of morning stiffness. A complete review of systems is also required to assess for systemic illnesses with articular manifestations such as inflammatory bowel disease and psoriatic arthritis (PsA). The presence of rash, fevers, weight loss, night sweats, GI, Raynaud's phenomenon, lupus symptoms (in particular, alopecia, photosensitivity, pleurisy, oral ulcers), visual symptoms, antecedent illness, or infection should be sought. Patients should also be questioned about functional limitations (opening jars, holding or lifting objects, climbing stairs, dressing self). Laboratory tests should include CBC, ESR, C-reactive protein (CRP), chem-7, and rheumatoid factor (RF), and anticyclic citrullinated (anti-CCP) antibodies.
B. An important diagnostic feature of arthritis is inflammation. Features suggestive of an inflammatory arthritis include morning stiffness >30 minutes, increased pain or stiffness with prolonged immobility (gelling), fever or chills, and weight loss. Physical examination of involved joints will often reveal bogginess, erythema, warmth, diminished range of motion, and deformities. Features suggestive of a noninflammatory arthritis include pain predominantly with use or weightbearing. Physical examination will usually show cool, nonerythematous joints. There may be an effusion, crepitus, and pain to palpation along the joint line and osteophytes in smaller joints (e.g., Heberden's and Bouchard's nodes).
If an effusion is present, arthrocentesis can be useful in establishing the diagnosis; the fluid should be sent for cell count with differential, crystal examination by polarized light microscopy, and culture with Gram stain. Cell counts of >2000 cells/mm³ are consistent with an inflammatory effusion.
C. Inflammatory arthritis with a clear axial component is highly suggestive of a spondyloarthropathy: ankylosing spondylitis (AS), reactive (formerly Reiter's) arthritis, PsA, and enteropathic arthritis. Search for evidence of associated symptoms and signs: rash of psoriasis (especially along the hairline, around and inside the ears, gluteal cleft, lateral margins of the feet), nail pitting, dactylitis (sausage digit), diarrhea or abdominal pain, urethritis, pyoderma gangrenosum, uveitis, or keratoderma blennorrhagica. A radiograph of the pelvis may show sacroiliitis but only after years of disease activity. An MRI with short T1 inversion recovery (STIR) sequences will show evidence of sacroiliitis years before a plain radiograph.
D. Symmetry of joint involvement is a useful distinguishing characteristic of the polyarthritides, but it is not absolute. It is not unusual for a “symmetric arthritis” such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA) to present asymmetrically, especially early in its course. Similarly, an “asymmetric arthritis” can rarely present with complete symmetry.
E. RA typically presents as a symmetric polyarthritis with a predilection for the wrists and small joints of the hands and feet. Involvement of the distal interphalangeal (DIP) joints makes RA very unlikely and another diagnosis such as PsA or inflammatory osteoarthritis (OA) should be considered. The arthritis of lupus can be subtle, and the examination is often normal. Subacute bacterial endocarditis (SBE) and hepatitis C virus (HCV) infections can both cause a polyarthritis with a false-positive RF result. Postinfectious reactions can cause a polyarthritis that is difficult to distinguish from RA, but these usually last 4–6 weeks and resolve spontaneously. Peripheral edema and Raynaud's phenomenon can be the presenting symptoms of scleroderma. Remitting seronegative symmetric synovitis with pitting edema (RS3PE) is a seronegative synovitis with prominent edema thought to be in the clinical spectrum of polymyalgia rheumatica (PMR). A new laboratory test with greater specificity for RA than the RF is anti-CCP antibody.
F. All the spondyloarthropathies can also present as an asymmetric polyarthritis with or without axial involvement. Postinfectious reactions to a myriad of microbes can cause polyarthritis, especially streptococcal infections. Infectious arthritis should be considered in the appropriate settings: Lyme in endemic regions, HIV/AIDS and gonococcal if risk factor are present, and SBE if other signs and symptoms of SBE are present.
G. Crystalline arthropathies (gout and calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate [CPPD]) are usually a monoarthritis but can present as a polyarthritis; a definitive diagnosis requires the demonstration of crystals in the joint fluid. Löfgren's syndrome (erythema nodosum, hilar adenopathy, periarthritis usually of the lower extremities) is an acute, self-limited form of sarcoidosis. Relapsing polychondritis can affect cartilage in joints, ears, nose, tracheobronchial tree, and proteoglycan-rich structures (eyes, heart, blood vessels, and inner ear). Still's disease causes daily fevers with a transient salmon-colored rash, elevated liver function test results, and ferritin. Recurrent attacks of fever and arthritis, especially in the setting of a positive family history, should prompt an evaluation for the periodic fever syndromes (familial Mediterranean fever, hyperimmunoglobulin D syndrome, tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated periodic syndrome, Muckle-Wells syndrome). Inflammatory OA should be considered if DIP joints are involved or if Heberden's or Bouchard's nodes are present. Rarer diagnoses include rheumatic fever, Whipple's disease, leukemic arthritis, and the arthritis associated with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS).
Noninflammatory arthritis with a radiograph showing bony hypertrophy and cartilage space loss is consistent with a diagnosis of OA. OA can be primary or secondary to obesity, trauma, or injury. More importantly, OA can occur secondary to systemic illnesses such as hemochromatosis, ochronosis, hyperparathyroidism, Wilson's disease, acromegaly, and amyloidosis. Early age of onset, atypical distribution (metacarpophalangeal joints, wrists, elbows, shoulders, ankles), or unusual radiographs should prompt an evaluation for secondary causes.
H. Other causes of polyarthritis include avascular necrosis (AVN), which can have symptoms out of proportion to the examination. It is not uncommon to see a joint effusion with AVN. Clubbing, bone pain, and parostosis on radiographs are seen with hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy (HPOA).

