POLYCYTHEMIA


A. Increased plasma hemoglobin (Hb) or hematocrit (Hct)
does not necessarily reflect an elevated total body RBC
mass. If repeat determinations confirm an increased
plasma Hb, RBC mass and plasma volume should be
measured using radiolabeled RBC and albumin. This
test, however, is performed in only a very small number
of centers. The report should contain total RBC mass in
percentages (100% being expected normal for the given
age, sex, and weight; diagnostic criteria for polycythemia
vera [PV] is !25% above the mean) and as total intravascular volume. In the absence of frank volume contraction, a patient with very high Hb (!18.5 g/dl in men
and !16.5 g/dl in women) nearly always has an elevated
RBC mass and the RBC mass test is not necessary.
B. Increased RBC mass indicates “true” polycythemia. An
increase in plasma Hb attributed to a normal or high
normal RBC mass and reduced plasma volume is
termed spurious polycythemia. In the past, many cases
of spurious polycythemia resulted from treatment with
diuretics for hypertension. Although such patients do
not have an expanded RBC mass, the decreased ratio
of plasma to RBC in blood results in unfavorable whole
blood rheology. Spurious polycythemia therefore may
be associated with a high incidence of morbid arterial
thrombotic events. Discontinue diuretics and substitute other forms of treatment, or evaluate the patient
to delineate other possible causes of the decreased
plasma volume.
C. If the RBC mass is elevated, test ABGs for Hb O2
saturation. When saturation is "90%, hypoxia may
cause increased erythropoietin (EPO) production
and secondary polycythemia. In some patients, hypoxia occurring only at night is revealed by sleep
studies, and it is typically sufficient to elevate EPO
levels and cause polycythemia. Nighttime blood gas
or oximeter readings may clarify this problem.
Regardless of the cause, elevation of Hb levels to

236

above normal generally is considered to result in
unfavorable rheology and O2 delivery. Provide supplemental O2 if indicated to lower the EPO stimulus.
Right-to-left cardiac shunts can also cause decreased
blood O2 content and polycythemia but usually present in childhood.
D. When plasma EPO levels are increased in the absence
of hypoxia, consider localized hypoxia within the kidney or impaired O2 delivery. Renal cysts and tumors
and hydronephrosis can compress intrarenal vessels
and cause local hypoxia, leading to increased renal
elaboration of EPO; renal artery stenosis can cause this
as well. Ultrasonography or CT of the kidneys usually
is diagnostic, but in some patients arteriography is necessary. Certain rare tumors (e.g., hepatomas, cerebellar hemangiomas, pheochromocytoma) can produce
ectopic EPO. Rarely, uterine fibromas have also been
associated with this finding.
Other less common etiologies of increased EPO production include Bartter’s syndrome, EPO receptor hypersensitivity, androgen therapy, and autotransfusions.
Secondary polycythemia can occur with normal
EPO levels in chronic hypoxia or decreased oxyhemoglobin desaturation. During the initial response to hypoxia, EPO levels are elevated, but once steady-state
erythrocytosis is achieved, the EPO levels required to
maintain an elevated Hb level may fall within the normal assay range.
E. Levels of abnormal Hb that result in reduced O2
unloading in tissues also cause tissue hypoxia and
increased EPO production. The most common cause
is probably increased carboxyhemoglobin levels from
CO in cigarette smoke. Carboxyhemoglobin levels
#6% can elevate EPO production and increase Hb
levels. Unusual congenital Hbs may also release
O2 poorly and cause polycythemia. Both result in a shift
in the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve.
(Continued on page 238)

237
POLYCYTHEMIA Suspected

A Increased plasma Hb
Red cell mass determination

Normal RBC mass
Decreased plasma volume
Spurious polycythemia
Discontinue diuretics

B Increased RBC mass

Normal plasma volume
True polycythemia

C ABG testing

O2 saturation "90%

O2 saturation !90%

Secondary
polycythemia hypoxia

Plasma EPO assessment

Provide supplemental O2

Increased EPO

D Renal ultrasonography
CT scan

or

Consider:
Hepatoma
Cerebellar
hemangioma
Fibroma
Pheochromocytoma

E Oxyhemoglobin

dissociation curve

Reduced or normal EPO

Autonomous erythropoiesis

Cont’d on p 239
Increased P-50
Hemoglobinopathy
Carboxyhemoglobin

238
F. Patients with normal plasma EPO levels and increased
RBC mass have autonomous erythropoiesis, usually PV.
In some cases this diagnosis remains unconfirmed because patients may lack other evidence of PV. Such
cases have recently been termed pure erythrocytosis
and usually are managed by phlebotomy. The Polycythemia Vera Study Group (PVSG) proposed criteria for
the diagnosis of PV. In concept, these criteria are clinical findings indicating the presence of a multilineage
myeloproliferative disorder. Absence of EPO elevation
and normal arterial O2 saturation are assumed because,
in the presence of hypoxia, increased erythropoiesis
cannot be definitively confirmed to be autonomous. An
increased RBC mass also is required. If these findings
are noted in a patient with a palpable spleen (major
criterion), the diagnosis of PV is established; two more
major criteria are clonal genetic abnormality other than
Ph chromosome or bcr/abl fusion gene in marrow cells
and endogenous erythroid colony formation in vitro. If
a palpable spleen, genetic abnormalty of the bone marrow, and in vitro colony formation are absent, the additional presence of two of the following four minor
criteria is required: thrombocytosis !400 million/dl,
WBC count !12 million/dl, bone marrow biopsy showing panmyelosis with prominent erythroid and megakaryocytic proliferation, and low serum EPO levels.
However, some patients with PV do not meet such
criteria. Some present after GI bleeding and may have
initially reduced Hb levels. Others lack the full diagnostic criteria but require therapy because of the unfavorable rheologic effects of polycythemia. Presenting
symptoms of polycythemia are nonspecific and largely
reflect increased blood viscosity. These include headaches, plethora, fatigue, hypertension, pruritus, erythromelalgia, ulceration of fingers and toes, joint pain,
epigastric pain, weight loss, paresthesias, visual disturbances, vertigo, tinnitus, and ruddy cyanosis. Some patients have major thrombotic events such as stroke or
myocardial infarction or bleeding manifestations. Such
patients should not undergo nonemergency surgery
until polycythemia has been corrected. For reasons that
have not been fully elucidated, polycythemia per se
results in a bleeding diathesis. Platelet dysfunction may
exacerbate this problem in PV but is often normal at
initial presentation.

G. PV is generally managed with phlebotomy to reduce
Hb levels to normal. Patients treated with phlebotomy
alone show an increased incidence of thrombotic
events early in their disease. Management approach to
a PV patient should start with a risk stratification.
Patients at low risk are those who are "60 years of
age, without a history of thrombosis and cardiovascular risk factors (smoking, obesity) and with a platelet
count of "1.5 million per microliter. Patients at high
risk are the complete opposite. Intermediate risk is
neither high risk nor low risk. Patients at low risk are
treated with aspirin in addition to phlebotomy, unless
they have a history of a hemorrhagic episode or platelet count !1 million and acquired vonWillebrand
syndrome. Patients at high risk also should receive
myelosuppressive therapy: interferon-$, hydroxyurea,
or busulfan is most commonly used. A relatively new
agent with profound effects on platelet production,
anegrelide, has been used to control elevated platelet
counts in PV and other myeloproliferative disorders,
but experience with this agent is limited.
Prognosis of untreated PV is poor; median survival is
6–18 months, with thrombosis being the most common
cause of death. Other causes of mortality in PV are
transformation to acute leukemia or to “spent phase”
(postpolycythemic myeloid metaplasia) and bleeding.

References
Berlin NI. Polycythemia vera. Semin Hematol 1997;34:1–5.
Brodmann S, Passweg JR, Gratwohl A, et al. Myeloproliferative disorders:
complications, survival and causes of death. Ann Hematol 2000;
79:312–318.
Kaplan ME, Mack K, Goldberg JD, et al. Long-term management
of polycythemia vera with hydroxyurea: a progress report. Semin
Hematol 1986;23:167.
Nissenson AR, Nimer SD, Walcott DL. Recombinant human erythropoietin and renal anemia: molecular biology, clinical efficacy, and nervous
system effects. Ann Intern Med 1991;114:402.
Prchal JT, Prchal JF. Evolving understanding of the cellular defect in
polycythemia vera: implications for its clinical diagnosis and molecular
pathophysiology. Blood 1994;83:1.
Spivak JL. Polycythemia vera: myths, mechanisms and management.
Blood 2002;100:4272–4290.
Tefferi A. Polycythemia vera: a comprehensive review and clinical
recommendations. Mayo Clin Proc 2003;78:174–194.
Wasserman LR. Polycythemia Vera Study Group: a historical
perspective. Semin Hematol 1986;23:183.

239
Autonomous erythropoiesis
(Cont’d from p 237)

F PVSG criteria

Minor:
Increased leukocyte alkaline
phosphate, WBC, or platelets
Increased B12
Increased B12-binding
capacity
Increased bone marrow biopsy
Low EPO

Major:
Palpable spleen
(normal O2
saturation)
Increased RBC
mass

Two major criteria
or
RBC mass and two
minor criteria
Polycythemia vera

G

Treat

