POSITIVE FECAL OCCULT BLOOD TEST (FOBT)


Colon cancer will affect 6% of us during our lifetimes.
Each year in the United States, there are !140,000 new
cases and 50,000 deaths from colorectal carcinoma. Accumulating evidence suggests that screening patients for
colorectal neoplasia may either prevent colorectal cancer
by detecting colon polyps that may evolve into carcinoma
or allow detection of colorectal cancer at a pre-symptomatic earlier stage, making curative therapy more likely. At
present this screening strategy consists of (1) testing stool
for the presence of blood, most commonly using guaiacimpregnated cards, flushable reagent pads, or immunochemical tests, and (2) directly observing the distal colon
by endoscopic or radiographic examinations.
A. The clinical use of a positive fecal occult blood test
(FOBT) obtained at the time of digital rectal examination has not been adequately validated. Despite the
absence of data regarding accuracy in detecting neoplastic disease, this is a widely accepted and practiced clinical test. It has been estimated that false-positive rates up
to 25% occur with FOBT on digital rectal examination.
Until the specificity of FOBT by digital rectal examination is clarified, it is recommended that patients undergo
FOBT only on spontaneously evacuated stools.
B. Patients should be sent home with FOBT cards, educated about diet and medicine, and asked to provide
stool samples. Any one of six samples testing positive
should be further evaluated. The test is positive in
4%–6% of asymptomatic patients tested, but only
5%–10% of these have colorectal cancer and 20%–30%
have colon polyps; therefore, 60%–70% are falsepositive results. In addition, 30%–50% of patients with
proven colon cancer have a false-negative test result.
Therefore, a positive test leads to further evaluation
in many patients without disease, and a negative test
result does not exclude disease.
C. For evaluating a patient with a positive FOBT result, two
strategies are available: (1) flexible sigmoidoscopy and
air-contrast barium enema or (2) colonoscopy, either
endoscopic or CT colography. With the first strategy, any
positive finding (e.g., polyp or cancer) necessitates colonoscopy. In addition, the first strategy alone misses 10%
of cancers and 20% of large polyps. Therefore, colonoscopy is the preferred means of evaluation when available.
It also may provide the most cost-effective strategy under certain conditions.

216

D. If symptoms dictate or if there is iron deficiency, a
normal colonoscopy indicates that a further search for
GI blood loss from the upper gut is indicated. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) should be performed to
evaluate the presence of upper GI structural lesions
(ulcer, inflammation, tumors, arteriovenous malformations [AVMs]).
E. Although small bowel tumors, or Crohn’s disease of the
small bowel, usually do not present with heme-positive
stools, a negative endoscopic examination of colon and
upper GI tract should prompt evaluation of the small
bowel, preferably by capsule endoscopy. However,
neither of these tests detects small mucosal lesions
such as AVM or small tumors.
F. If stools remain positive for fecal occult blood, consider invasive studies such as angiography or small
bowel enteroscopy or capsule, which are now widely
available. These may permit visualization of small
vascular lesions or tumors undetectable by other
means.
G. If a colon cancer or large cherry-red polyp is found,
this may be presumed to be the cause of bleeding and
may be treated endoscopically or surgically. Similarly
the presence of mucosal inflammation (i.e., colitis) is
also presumably the source. However, the presence of
AVMs or diverticula is not sufficient to exclude either
proximal source.

References
Barry MJ, Mulley AG, Richter JM. Effect of workup strategy on the costeffectiveness of fecal occult blood screening for colorectal cancer.
Gastroenterology 1987;93:301.
Fleisher ED, Goldberg SB, Browning TH, et al. Detection surveillance
of colorectal cancer. JAMA 1989;261:580.
Guittet L, Bouvier V, Mariotte N, et al. Comparison of a guaiac based and
an immunochemical faecal occult blood test in screening for colorectal
cancer in a general average risk population. Gut 2007;56:210–214.
Epub 2006 Aug 4.
Kim DH, Pickhardt PJ, Taylor AJ, et al. CT colonography versus colonoscopy for the detection of advanced neoplasia. N Engl J Med
2007;357:1403–1412.
Knight KK, Fielding JE, Battista R. Occult blood screening colorectal
cancer. JAMA 1989;261:587.
Levin B, Bond JH. Colorectal cancer screening: recommendations of the
U.S. Preventive Task Force. Gastroenterology 1996;111:1381.
Read TE, Read JD, Butterly LF. Importance of adenomas 5 mm or less
in diameter that are detected by sigmoidoscopy. N Engl J Med
1997;336:8.

217
Patient with FOBT

A Stool obtained

B Spontaneously

from digital
rectal
examination

evacuated stool

Noninterpretable
Repeat test

Abnormal

C

Colonoscopy or
CT Colography

G Polyp

Normal

D Decreased hematocrit

Hematocrit or iron
level normal
No upper GI
symptoms

or iron
Upper GI symptoms
EGD

E

Normal

F Consider:

Small bowel
enteroscopy
Angiography
Capsule endoscopy

Normal

Abnormal

Enteroclysis
or
Small Bowel
Follow-Through
or
Capsule Endoscopy

Gastric ulcer
Duodenal
ulcer
Cancer
Esophagitis

Abnormal
Crohn’s disease
Tumor
Treat
Accordingly

Cancer
Colitis
AVMs

Treat
Accordingly

No further
evaluation
warranted

Treat
Accordingly

