POSITIVE TUBERCULIN SKIN TEST (PPD)

Tuberculosis (TB) infection remains a leading cause of
morbidity worldwide, making it an important area for
public health prevention and treatment efforts. In the
United States, its impact is seen in the 10–15 million
individuals who are infected. Although annual rates of TB
infection in the United States are declining, there are still
cases in every state, and drug-resistant TB looms as the
next hurdle in the care of patients with TB. One of the
most important decision points in evaluating and treating patients for TB is to determine whether they have
active TB disease or latent TB infection (LTBI). As part
of that diagnostic evaluation, the tuberculin skin test
(purified protein derivative; PPD) has historically been and
continues to be an important tool.
A. Testing for TB or LTBI using the PPD is most useful
when applied carefully in targeted populations. Random testing is of little utility and may unnecessarily
expose patients to unneeded medications or health
care evaluations. Knowledge of disease prevalence
and patient risk are important factors in deciding who
to test. The overall goals of PPD testing are to find
people with LTBI who would benefit from prophylactic treatment and to find people with TB disease who
would benefit from treatment. Individuals at low risk
should not be routinely tested. PPD testing is safe in
pregnancy.
B. Certain conditions place people into high-risk groups
for exposure to TB. These conditions include close
contact with a known or suspected case of TB, foreignborn individuals from endemic areas, residents of highrisk settings such as jails or nursing homes, health care
workers, individuals who are medically underserved,
injection drug users, or people in high-risk racial or
ethnic populations. Once infected (i.e., patient has
LTBI), individuals with HIV, substance abuse, diabetes,
silicosis, prolonged immunosuppression, head and neck
cancer, end-stage renal disease, hematologic malignancies, low body weight, gastrectomy or intestinal bypass,
or malabsorption syndromes are at higher risk for progression to active disease.
C. The PPD skin test is a combination of low molecular
weight proteins and carbohydrate components of the
tubercle bacillus. It is administered intradermally on
the volar forearm as 5 thousand units (TU) of PPD.
Results are interpreted 48–72 hours later based

502

D.

E.

F.

G.

H.

on millimeters of skin induration, with predetermined thresholds for positivity based on patient
demographics and risk factors to determine further
treatment.
It is important that PPD results be read by health care
professionals rather than by patients. The presence
of induration meeting threshold criteria is termed
positive PPD and generally represents infection with
TB. False-positive PPD results may arise from nontuberculous mycobacterial infection or BCG (Bacille
Calmette-Guérin) vaccination. False-negative PPD
results may occur in the setting of anergy, recent
TB infection, recent vaccination with live viruses, or
overwhelming TB disease. Nonetheless, in immunocompetent individuals with latent TB infection, the
PPD test approaches 100% sensitivity. On average,
there is a 10% lifetime risk of developing TB disease
from LTBI with a normal immune system. In patients
who are HIV positive, this risk increases to a 7%–10%
annual risk of developing TB disease. The greatest
risk in all people occurs within the first 2 years after
initial exposure to TB.
A result of 0–5 mm in any patient is read as “negative.”
Although there is a small risk of a false-negative result
in patients who are anergic (usually as a result of
immunosuppression), the current American Thoracic
Society/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/
Infectious Diseases Society of America (ATS/CDC/
ISDA) guidelines do not recommend routinely planting
controls to test for anergy.
A PPD result is positive at !5 mm for patients who
are HIV positive, recent contacts of those with TB,
persons with chest radiographic findings of fibrotic
changes, or patients who have received organ transplants or are immunosuppressed.
A threshold of !10 mm is used for people who have
recently arrived from high prevalence areas, injection
drug users, residents of nursing homes or jails, people
who work with tuberculosis in a laboratory setting,
health care workers, or children/adolescents exposed
to adults at high risk.
A threshold of !15 mm is considered positive for people with no known risk factors for TB. As previously
stated, for the most part, these patients should not have
a PPD placed because LTBI testing should be targeted
to those with increased risk of infection.

503
Patient with POSITIVE TUBERCULIN SKIN TEST

A

B Individual identified as needing

testing for tuberculosis based
on medical history, demographics,
or exposure

C PPD placed by health care professional
D Patient returns to have PPD

read by health care professional
at 48–72 hr

E 0–5 mm

Negative

Potentially anergic
if no induration
Consider whether
patient is immune
suppressed

G !10 mm

F !5 mm
Positive if patient is:
HIV positive
Recent contact of a
TB case
Has radiograph
consistent with old TB
Immunosuppressed or
organ transplant recipient

Positive if patient is:
Injection drug user
Resident of highrisk setting
(jail/nursing home)
Health care worker
TB laboratory employee
Recent immigrant from
high prevalence area

H !15 mm
Positive for
patients with no
known risk factors

Evaluate for active
TB disease

I If no evidence for active
TB disease, determine
risk/benefit of treatment
choices for LTBI and
begin therapy

I. Once a patient is established as having a positive PPD,
the next step involves using clinical and radiographic
information to determine whether he or she has LTBI
or active TB disease. For LTBI, the current ATS/CDC/
ISDA guidelines recommend a course of isoniazid
(also called INH) 300 mg daily for 9 months’ duration,
regardless of whether the patient is immunocompromised. Because patient compliance is often a challenge, there are three alternative regimens of one or
two drugs of shorter duration.

References
American Thoracic Society Statement: Targeted tuberculin testing and
treatment of latent tuberculosis infection. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2000;161:5221–5247.
Blumberg HM, Burman WJ, Chaisson RE, et al. American Thoracic
Society/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/Infectious
Diseases Society of America: Treatment of tuberculosis. Am J Respir
Crit Care Med 2003;167:603.
Core curriculum on tuberculosis: What the clinician should know, 4th ed.
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
Center for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for HIV,
STD, and TB Prevention, Division of Tuberculosis Elimination, 2000.

