POST–MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION CARE AND COUNSELING
Management and counseling of patients after myocardial
infarction (MI) should be focused on the evaluation and
modification of factors contributing to this disease process,
treatment of complications such as heart failure and dysrhythmia, and control of recurrent angina. Interventions
include education, behavioral modification, and pharmacologic secondary prevention. In some cases referral for
further testing and invasive intervention may be required.
A. The history should include details of the patient’s
hospital course and general medical history. Details of
the hospital course should include the extent of cardiac
injury, treatment (percutaneous coronary intervention
[PCI], coronary artery bypass graph [CABG], conservative therapy), complications (arrhythmia, heart
failure), and any diagnostic studies performed prior to
discharge (ECG, stress testing). Discharge medications and any adverse reactions to medications should
be noted. General history should include symptoms of
peripheral vascular disease (PVD) or cerebrovascular
disease (CVD), tobacco use, dietary and exercise habits, diabetes, and drug use.
B. The examination should include evaluation for signs of
ventricular dysfunction, valvular disease, or arrhythmia.
Blood pressure, weight/body mass index (BMI), and
waist circumference should be measured.
C. Laboratory testing should include creatinine; fasting
lipids; fasting glucose; and, in the case of patients with
diabetes, a hemoglobin A1c.

102

D. Testing of patients after MI should include a resting
ECG and in most cases an echocardiogram. To accurately assess convalescent ventricular function, the
echocardiogram should be performed after 6 weeks.
However, earlier testing is warranted if it will be used
for decision making. In patients managed without angiography or (in some cases) with incomplete revascularization, a submaximal stress test should be performed prior to hospital discharge. Exercise testing is
preferred to pharmacologic stress.
E. Risk assessment should include evaluation for left
ventricular (LV) dysfunction, high-risk indicators
on stress testing, symptoms concerning for arrhythmia, or moderate to severe anginal symptoms. In
some cases cardiac catheterization, electrophysiology evaluation, or additional revascularization may
be indicated.
F. Education should be provided for both the patient
and family. Emphasis is placed on the importance of
lifestyle changes (tobacco cessation, exercise, weight
loss, and dietary restrictions) and their impact on
disease process. Acute cardiac symptoms should be
reviewed along with the use of antianginal therapy
(nitroglycorin [NIG]) and how to contact emergency
medical services. Families may be given education
and resources on CPR and automated external defibrillator (AED) use. Patients should be advised to
avoid potentially harmful medications (e.g., sildenafil
while using nitrates).
(Continued on page 104)

103
Patient for POST–MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION* CARE AND COUNSELING

A

STEMI vs. NSTEMI
Treatment (PCI,
CABG, conservative)
In-hospital complications
Symptoms of angina,
PVD, CVD, CHF
Tobacco use
Palpitations, syncope

E

B

History

Signs/symptoms of
CHF/LV dysfunction
Signs/symptoms of
PVD, CVD
Weight/BMI
Waist circumference

Risk assessment

Recurrent symptoms
in unstable pattern

C

Examination

High-risk
findings

Refer for
acute care

D

Laboratory testing

Renal function
Fasting lipids
Screening for
diabetes mellitus
Hgb A1c if diabetic

Testing

ECG
Echtocardiogram (ECHO)
Stress testing

Submaximal exercise
tolerance test (ETT) prior
to hospital discharge if
conservative management
or consider if PCI and
significant residual disease

F

Education

Treatment

Patient

Family

Importance of diet
and exercise
Acute cardiac symptoms
and how to find care
Avoidance of potentially
harmful medications
Use of nitrates

Acute cardiac symptoms
and how to find care
Stress importance of
lifestyle changes
CPR and AED education

Cont’d on p 105

High-risk stress test
Moderate to severe
anginal symptoms
LV dysfunction ECHO
Signs/symptoms of CHF
Syncope/presyncope

Consider referral to
cardiology for further
diagnostic/invasive
interventions

*Patients discharged from hospital after MI.
CHF, Congestive heart failure; NSTEMI, non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction; STEMI, ST-segment elevation
myocardial infarction.

104
G. Pharmacologic secondary prevention aims to modify the
principal risk factors of dyslipidemia and hypertension,
in conjunction with antiplatelet, antiarrhythmic (beta
blockers), and antiischemic therapy.
H. Psychosocial assessment should include evaluation for
symptoms of depression or anxiety related to or contributing to the patient’s symptoms with appropriate
therapy when indicated. Coping mechanisms should
be assessed, and referral for counseling should be
made when indicated. In the case of patients with
overall poor prognosis, discussion regarding values and
overall goals of care is important.
I. Behavioral counseling is a critical intervention for
secondary prevention and should be addressed at each
office visit, including dietary/weight loss strategies,
smoking cessation, and exercise. A low-fat and lowcholesterol diet is recommended as specified per
References
Antman EM, Anbe DT, Armstrong PW, et al. ACC/AHA guidelines for
the management of patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction:
executive summary: a report of the ACC/AHA Task Force on Practice
Guidelines (Committee to Revise the 1999 Guidelines on the Management of Patients With Acute Myocardial Infarction). J Am Coll
Cardiol 2004;44:671–719.
Berkman LF, Blumenthal J, Burg M, et al., Enhancing Recovery in
Coronary Heart Disease Patients Investigators (ENRICHD). Effects
of treating depression and low perceived social support on the clinical
events after myocardial infarction: the Enhancing Recovery in
Coronary Heart Disease Patients (ENRICHD) Randomized Trial.
JAMA 2003;289:3106–3116.
Dalal H, Evans PH, Campbell JL. Recent developments in secondary
prevention and cardiac rehabilitation after acute myocardial infarction.
BMJ 2004;328:693–697.

American Hospital Association/American College of
Cardiology (AHA/ACC) guidelines. Nutrition counseling should be considered for all patients after
MI, especially in the case of diabetes and obesity.
Education and information regarding available
resources should be provided. After MI most patients
may begin daily walking for 10–15 minutes with education regarding possible symptoms. This may be
increased to 30 minutes of physical activity each day.
Exercise treadmill testing (ETT) can be useful in assessing patient needs with regard to exercise, and
symptom-limited testing should be performed in those
managed without revascularization. In cases of patients with high-risk stress testing, poor functional
capacity, or poor results with home rehabilitation, referral for supervised cardiac rehabilitation should be
considered where available.
Daly LE, Mulcahy R, Graham IM, Hickey N. Long term effect on
mortality of stopping smoking after unstable angina and myocardial
infarction. BMJ (Clin Res Ed) 1982;287:324–326.
Froelicher ES, Kee LL, Newton KM, et al. Return to work, sexual activity, and other activities after acute myocardial infarction. Heart Lung
1994;23:423–435.
Krone RJ, Gillespie JA, Weld FM, et al. Low-level exercise testing after
myocardial infarction: usefulness in enhancing clinical risk stratification. Circulation 1985;71:80–89.
O’Connor GT, Buring JE, Yusuf S, et al. An overview of randomized
trials of rehabilitation with exercise after myocardial infarction. Circulation 1989;80:234–244.
Smith SC, Blair SN, Bonow RO, et al. AHA/ACC Scientific Statement:
AHA/ACC Guidelines for Preventing Heart Attack and Death in Patients
with Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease: 2001 update: a statement
for healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association and the
American College of Cardiology. Circulation 2001;104:1577–1579.

105
Patient for POST–MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION* CARE AND COUNSELING
(Cont’d from p 103)

Treatment

G

Pharmacologic

Lipid lowering:
NCEP guidelines
Goal LDL !70 mg/dl
Statins preferred
Antiplatelet therapy:
ASA 75–162 mg lifetime,
clopidogrel ! 9 –12 mo
Beta blockers:
All post-MI patients unless
contraindicated
Antihypertensive therapy:
Goal per JNC 7
ACE inhibitor/ARB:
If heart failure,
LV dysfunction, or diabetes
Consider for vascular
prevention
Antiischemic agents (NTG)
Warfarin:
If indication for
anticoagulation (AF, mural
thrombus, etc.)
Diabetes:
Optimize glycemia

H

Psychosocial

Assessment and
treatment of
depression/anxiety
Assessment of
overall prognosis and
patient’s values with
regard to goals of
therapy

I

Behavioral

Diet plan/
nutrition referral
Smoking cessation plan
Exercise plan/
cardiac rehabilitation

Supervised exercise program
for moderate- to high-risk patients
Supervised rehabilitation program may
enhance education and exercise
for all patients
Symptom-limited ETT at 3–6 wk after MI
prior to formal exercise program
Maintain activity !5 METS until 3–6 wk
follow-up with physician " symptomlimited ETT

*Patients discharged from hospital after MI.
ACE, Angiotensin-converting enzyme; AF, atrial fibrillation; ARB, angiotensin receptor blocker; ASA, acetylsalicylic acid
JNC, Joint National Committee; LDL, low-density lipoprotein; METS, metabolic equivalents (multiples of resting oxygen
consumption); NCEP, National Cholesterol Education Program.

