POSTEXPOSURE PROPHYLAXIS FOR HIV
AND HEPATITIS B AND C


The following provides a four-step process for managing occupational and nonoccupational exposures to HIV,
hepatitis B, and hepatitis C. After obtaining baseline laboratory evaluation for the source and exposed individuals (step 1), the exposure is categorized according to risk
(step 2), then the appropriate postexposure prophylaxis
(PEP) regimen is chosen (step 3), and a follow-up plan is
defined (step 4).
A. Step 1. Baseline Testing: When HIV and hepatitis
status of the source patient are not known, the source
person should undergo evaluation for HIV antibody
(with rapid testing, if available), hepatitis B surface
antigen, and hepatitis C antibody. If the source patient
is known to be infected with HIV, viral load, antiretroviral treatment history, and genotype testing should be
requested. These results guide risk assessment for the
exposed individual and the best choice of PEP.
The patient who has been exposed should also have
the following baseline tests performed: HIV antibody,
hepatitis B screen (surface and core antibody and surface antigen), and hepatitis C antibody. If the source
patient is known to be positive for the hepatitis C virus
(HCV), the exposed individual should have baseline
HCV RNA and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) in addition to hepatitis C antibody testing. If the exposed
individual is likely to need antiretroviral prophylaxis,
baseline screening laboratory tests should also include
a CBC, serum electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, glucose,
and liver enzymes.
B. Step 2. Risk Stratification: The risk of transmission
of HIV and hepatitis B and C viruses is related to (1)
type of exposure (percutaneous, mucous membrane,
nonintact skin); (2) type and amount of fluid/tissue
involved (blood, fluids with blood, semen or vaginal
secretions, cerebrospinal fluid [CSF], synovial, pleural, peritoneal, or amniotic fluids); (3) infectious status
of the source patient; and (4) susceptibility of the

340

exposed individual. In the occupational setting, the
majority of exposures are via percutaneous injury or
mucous membrane/nonintact skin contamination with
blood or other body fluids. Outside the health care
setting, sexual encounters comprise the majority of
exposures.
HIV Exposures. The average risk of becoming infected with HIV from a needlestick exposure ranges
from 0.04%–0.3%. Risk is increased when exposure
involves a deep injury, when there is visible blood on
the device, when the device was in the source patient’s vein or artery, or when the source patient has a
high viral load. For mucous membrane exposure to
HIV-infected blood, the risk of infection is approximately 1%, and for nonintact skin exposures (abrasions, open wounds, dermatitis) risk is !0.1%.
Highest-risk nonoccupational exposures occur when
the source patient is known to be HIV infected and the
exposure involves needle sharing (IV drug use) or receptive anal intercourse. Insertive anal intercourse and
penile-vaginal intercourse are considered lower-risk
exposures. Oral sex and sex with a condom in place
carry the lowest risk of HIV transmission.
Hepatitis B Exposures. The risk of contracting hepatitis B from needlestick exposure is 6%–30%. Risk of
hepatitis B acquisition from a mucous membrane or
nonintact skin exposure and through fluids such as semen/vaginal fluid/saliva is difficult to quantify, but
transmission via these routes is reported. The presence
of hepatitis B surface antibodies secondary to prior
vaccination or past infection confers lifelong protective
immunity.
Hepatitis C Exposures. Risk of contracting hepatitis C
from a needlestick when the source patient is hepatitis
C positive is in the range of 1%–7%. Transmission rarely
occurs from mucous membrane exposures to blood, and
risk from exposure to HCV-infected body fluids other
than blood is thought to be extremely low.
(Continued on page 342)

341
Patient with HEPATITIS EXPOSURE

A Baseline testing
Laboratory tests for
exposed patient

Laboratory tests for
source patient

Hepatitis B core and surface antibody
and surface antigen and hepatitis C antibody
If source is high risk or known to be hepatitis C
positive, consider hepatitis C RNA and ALT
in exposed individual

Hepatitis B surface antigen/
hepatitis C antibody

B Risk stratification

Low-risk event

High-risk event

Hepatitis B

Hepatitis C

Any percutaneous exposure;
Any percutaneous exposure;
any mucous membrane or
any mucous membrane or
nonintact skin exposure with
nonintact skin exposure to
blood-containing body fluid
blood or high-risk body fluid
Any of the above when source
Any of the above when source
known to be hepatitis positive
known to be hepatitis positive
or from high-risk group
or from high-risk group

Hepatitis B

Hepatitis C

Intact skin exposure to
blood or body fluid; any
type of exposure to non–
blood-containing feces,
saliva, urine, or sputum

Mucous membrane or
nonintact skin exposure
with non–bloodcontaining body fluid
Intact skin exposure to
blood or body fluid

Cont’d on p 343

342
C. Step 3. Intervention According to Level of Risk:
HIV: Early use of antiretroviral therapy after exposure to HIV-infected blood or body fluid decreases
viral acquisition. The decision to initiate antiretroviral treatment should be based on risk assessment of
the exposure. This assessment combines the type of
exposure with knowledge of the source patient. In
September 2005 the U.S. Public Health Service published updated guidelines for the management of
occupational HIV exposures. The guideline divides
exposures into percutaneous versus mucous membrane and nonintact skin exposures. Within each of
these categories, exposure type is further stratified to
high-risk versus low-risk exposure.
For percutaneous exposures that are “less severe”
(solid needle or superficial injury) when the source
patient is HIV positive but asymptomatic with known
low viral load (!1500 copies/ml), a basic two-drug
regimen is recommended. When the source patient is
symptomatic or has AIDS, acute seroconversion, or
known high viral load, three or more drugs should be
initiated. If there is concern that the source patient has
a resistant virus, expert consultation should be sought
but therapy should not be delayed in the interim.
When the source patient’s HIV status is unknown or no
information is obtainable from the source, no PEP is
warranted unless there are known HIV risk factors or
the exposure has occurred in a setting where HIV infection in the source case is likely. In these cases, twodrug PEP is recommended.
For percutaneous exposures with “more severe”
characteristics (large-bore hollow needle, deep puncture, visible blood on device, needle in patient’s artery
or vein), expanded three-drug or greater than threedrug regimen is recommended for all patients with
HIV, regardless of symptoms or viral load.
For mucous membrane or nonintact skin exposures
that are “small volume” (few drops), a basic two-drug
regimen is recommended when the source patient is
HIV positive, regardless of the source patient’s symptoms or viral load. If the source patient’s HIV status is
unknown or the exposure is from an unknown source,
no PEP is warranted.
For a mucous membrane or nonintact skin exposure that is “large volume” (major blood splash), twodrug regimens should be prescribed when the source
patient is HIV positive and asymptomatic with low
viral load. If the source patient is HIV positive with
symptoms and high viral load, a regimen with three or
more drugs is recommended. For unknown HIV status or unknown source and large-volume exposure,
consideration can be given to two-drug regimen if
HIV risk factors are present in the individual or source
population.
The choice of antiretroviral regimen should be
based on risk level of exposure, the individual’s
preexisting medical conditions/pregnancy status,
and potential for drug interactions and side effects.

Recommended two-drug regimens include the
following:
• Zidovudine (ZDV) " lamivudine (3TC) or emtricitabine (FTC)
• Stavudine (d4T) " lamivudine (3TC) or emtricitabine (FTC)
• Tenofovir (TDF) " lamivudine (3TC) or emtricitabine (FTC)
For expanded PEP regimens (three or more drugs),
the third drug should be a protease inhibitor. The
recommended agent is ritonavir-boosted lopinavir
(LPV/r). Alternatives include atazanavir (ATZ), fosamprenavir, ritonavir-boosted indinavir (IDV/r), ritonavirboosted saquinavir (SQV/r), and nelfinavir (NFV). Efavirenz (EFZ) can be considered as a third agent if the
source patient has known protease inhibitor–resistant
virus. Use of efavirenz in pregnancy has been associated with fetal malformations; thus, this drug should
be used with caution in women of childbearing age.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
has released guidelines for PEP after nonoccupational
exposures. PEP is recommended only for highest-risk
exposures (IV drug use or high-risk sexual exposure to
individual known to have HIV) when the individual
presents within 72 hours of the exposure. If the
source’s HIV status is unknown, PEP can be considered on a case-by-case basis. Three-drug regimens are
recommended in these high-risk exposures. Recommended regimens include the following:
• Efavirenz (EFZ) 1 lamivudine (3TC) or emtricitabine (FTC) 1 zidovudine (ZDV) or tenofovir
(TFV)
• Lopinavir/ritonavir (LPV/r) " zidovudine (ZDV) "
lamivudine (3TC) or emtricitabine (FTC)
When there is concern about toxicity or adherence
with a three-drug regimen, consideration can be given
to two-drug PEP, as described earlier for occupational
exposures. For all sexual exposures, risk of other sexually transmitted diseases and pregnancy should also be
addressed.
Hepatitis B. In the setting of a high-risk exposure
(source patient known to be positive for hepatitis B
surface antigen or from a high-risk group and percutaneous/mucous membrane/nonintact skin exposure)
PEP is warranted for all nonimmune individuals. For
individuals who have completed the hepatitis B vaccine series and are known responders (surface antibody positive with titer #10 mU/ml at any point after
vaccine series), no further intervention is needed. Of
note, titers may fall many years after hepatitis B vaccine series. An initial antibody response confers lifelong immunity, even if titers at the time of exposure
are !10 mU/ml or undetectable. If the individual has
not been vaccinated or is a known vaccine nonresponder after one vaccine series, hepatitis B immune
globulin (HBIG) should be given (preferably within
72 hours of exposure, dose 0.06 ml/kg) and a vaccine
series should be initiated. If the individual has received
(Continued on page 344)

343
Patient with HEPATITIS EXPOSURE
(Cont’d from p 341)

C Intervention
Exposed individual
hepatitis B immune
No PEP warranted

Exposed individual
hepatitis B nonimmune
or vaccine nonresponder
after 1 series (!10 mU/ml)

Exposed individual
hepatitis B vaccine
nonresponder after
2 series (!10 mU/ml)

Hepatitis C exposure
(high- or low-risk event)
No PEP (currently
available agents of
no proven benefit)

Hepatitis B PEP for
high-risk event

Hepatitis B PEP
for low-risk event

Hepatitis B PEP
for high-risk event

Hepatitis B PEP
for low-risk event

HBIG (0.6 ml/kg)
within 72 hr and
initiate vaccine series

Initiate vaccine
series

HBIG (0.6 ml/kg)
within 72 hr
Repeat HBIG in
4 wk

No PEP warranted

Cont’d on p 345

344
two hepatitis B vaccine series with no antibody response after the second series, HBIG should be give at
the time of exposure and repeated 4 weeks later. If the
individual has been vaccinated but the antibody response is unknown, the exposed individual should be
tested for the presence of surface antibody. If absent,
HBIG should be given and a second vaccine series
initiated.
For an exposure where the source’s status is unknown and the exposed person has not been vaccinated,
the individual should begin the vaccine series. Previously vaccinated/known responders need no treatment.
Known nonresponders can be treated with HBIG and
vaccine series if the source is believed to be high risk
for hepatitis B. If the exposed individual’s antibody status is unknown, testing for antibody should be initiated
and management of exposure should be based on the
source patient’s risk of hepatitis B. When the source
patient is negative for hepatitis B surface antigen, unvaccinated individuals should undergo vaccine series.
No treatment other than vaccination is warranted in
this circumstance.
Hepatitis C. No prophylactic therapy has been shown
to decrease the risk of hepatitis C exposure. Early antiviral treatment of acute HCV has been associated with
high cure rate. Therefore, careful follow-up for seroconversion is warranted (see Step 4).
D. Step 4. Follow-up: If HIV antiretroviral therapy is
prescribed, the individual should be given a 72- to 96-hour
supply of medication, with follow-up at that time to receive the HIV source patient’s results. If the source is
found to be HIV negative, antiretrovirals should be
discontinued. If the source patient is known to be HIV
infected or found to be HIV positive, or if source is
unable to be tested and believed to be high risk, the patient should be continued on antiretrovirals with follow-up
at 2 and 6 weeks for routine monitoring of medication side
effects and laboratory tests (glucose, electrolytes, and liver

function tests). A total of 28 days of therapy is recommended. At 6 weeks, 3 months, and 6 months following
exposure, the individual should have follow-up HIV antibody testing.
For hepatitis B and/or C exposure in nonimmune
individuals, follow-up hepatitis testing should be done
at 6 weeks, 3 months, and 6 months following exposure. For individuals with high-risk hepatitis C exposure, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing can be
done at 4–6 weeks to make an early diagnosis of new
infection.
Individuals who have had an exposure to blood or
body fluids infected with HIV, hepatitis B, or hepatitis
C should be counseled to use condoms when engaging
in sexual intercourse and to refrain from donation of
blood or blood products until 6-month testing documents lack of seroconversion. Women should be counseled on risks of becoming pregnant and/or breastfeeding during this 6-month period (because of risk of
infection to the fetus).
References
Bristol Myers Squibb: Drug Information on Sustiva (Efavirenz). Available
at www.sustiva.com. Accessed January 17, 2008.
Case-control study of HIV seroconversion in healthcare workers after
percutaneous exposure to HIV-infected blood—France, United
Kingdom, and United States. January 1988–August 1994. MMWR
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 1995;44:929–933.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Antiretroviral postexposure
prophylaxis after sexual, injection-drug use, or other nonoccupational
exposure to HIV in the United States. MMWR Morbidity and Mortality
Weekly Report 2005;54(RR02):1–20.
National Institutes of Health consensus development conference statement.
Management of Hepatitis C: 2002, Final statement. September 12,
2002.
Protocol for Post-Exposure Antiretroviral Prophylaxis: Occupational
Health Services, Yale-New Haven Hospital. Updated October 2002.
Updated U.S. Public Health Service Guidelines for the Management
of Occupational Exposures to HIV and Recommendations for
Postexposure Prophylaxis. MMWR Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
Report 2005;54(RR-9):1–13.

345
Patient with HEPATITIS EXPOSURE
(Cont’d from p 343)

D Follow-up of exposed individual

Source hepatitis B
positive or unknown but
from high-risk group and
exposed nonimmune
Repeat hepatitis B panel at 4 wk,
3 mo, and 6 mo
***No follow-up testing required
for hepatitis B if exposed has
documented immunity

Source hepatitis C
positive or unknown but
from high-risk group

Source hepatitis B
and C negative
No follow-up warranted

Hepatitis C antibody at
4 wk, 3 mo, and 6 mo
Consider hepatitis C RNA
testing at 4 wk
For hepatitis C seroconversion,
early referral to specialist is
recommended

