PREMENSTRUAL DYSPHORIC DISORDER

A. More than 40% of women experiencing cyclic menstruation report premenstrual symptoms, ranging from
negligible in many women to disabling in up to 15%.
Many symptoms and signs have been described as part
of premenstrual syndrome (PMS), including bloating,
edema, weight gain, breast pain, acne, appetite changes,
headaches, joint pain, diarrhea, constipation, anger or
irritability, increased interpersonal conflicts, anxiety,
aggression, depression, lethargy, fatigue, sleep disorder (hypersomnia, insomnia), difficulty concentrating,
and restlessness. None of these symptoms is pathognomonic. It is the cyclic occurrence of symptoms beginning near or after ovulation and resolving soon after
the onset of menses that is of diagnostic significance.
In addition, the premenstrual changes must be significant enough to interfere with work, school, or usual
social activities or relationships with others. The role of
ovarian steroids, prolactin, prostaglandins, mineralocorticoids, neurotransmitters, endogenous opiates, vitamin and mineral deficiencies, and psychological factors is unclear.
B. Diagnostic evaluation of PMS involves clinical evaluation and review of the patient’s prospective daily charting of the timing, type, and rating of severity of symptoms for at least two menstrual cycles. Take a medical
history to rule out cardiac, renal, or thyroid disease,
collagen vascular disease, and diabetes. Also exclude
other problems, including anemia, breast disease, dysmenorrhea, endometriosis, perimenopausal changes,
or premenstrual exacerbation of allergies, arthritis,
asthma, diabetes, irritable bowel syndrome, migraine,
and seizure disorders. Determine whether the patient
has premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD), which
affects 5%–10% of normally cycling women. Many
women with severe PMS meet the diagnostic criteria
for PMDD. PMS/PMDD must be differentiated from
other psychiatric disorders (anxiety, depression, eating
or personality disorders) because these disorders also
cause symptoms in the follicular phase. Perform physical examination and laboratory testing as needed.
Investigators have been unable to document specific
changes in hormone levels, prolactin, aldosterone, endorphins, and glucose tolerance. There are no laboratory tests to diagnose PMS.
C. It is essential to review the patient’s daily symptom
chart, which has tracked symptoms for two complete

608

menstrual cycles. A variety of forms are available. One
way is to ask the patient to list the symptoms that affect
her most. The checklist is started on the first day of the
period and each evening the symptoms are rated on a
scale of 0–4 (0 ! symptom is absent; 4 ! symptom is
severe and patient cannot function). At least five symptom scores during the luteal phase must show a marked
change from scores in the follicular phase for PMS
to be diagnosed. For severe PMS and PMDD, the
questionnaire developed by Endicott and Harrison is
helpful.
D. Review of treatment research fails to demonstrate
consistently effective therapy, and the rate of response to placebo appears to be 50%. Numerous
treatments have been advocated. Initial interventions
are education and support, stress reduction, healthy
nutrition, and regular exercise. Many women are reassured by chart review and can plan their schedules
according to symptom severity, use relaxation exercises, join a support group, or participate in an exercise program to relieve stress. Eating complex carbohydrates (whole grains, beans, fresh fruits, vegetables)
and low-protein foods and tapering caffeine intake,
especially during the luteal phase, may diminish
symptoms but efficacy remains unproved. Neither
natural progesterone (in suppository or micronized
oral preparations) nor synthetic progestins are effective for PMS.
E. Offer medical treatment or referral to women who
meet the diagnostic criteria for PMDD. Consider prescribing a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI)
if there are symptoms of PMDD or if PMS is severe
and symptoms include psychosocial difficulties. When
SSRIs do not work, an anxiolytic agent may be the next
choice. Anovulation therapy with oral contraceptives
(OCPs), danazol, and gonadotropin-releasing hormone
(GnRH) agonists (goserelin acetate, leuprolide acetate,
nafarelin acetate) can relieve symptoms of severe
PMS, but unpleasant side effects are common and lead
to discontinuance. OCPs appear to relieve PMS symptoms in about one third of women. Consider further
evaluation or referral when the diagnosis is uncertain,
another medical or psychiatric disorder is suspected,
the patient is a risk to herself or others, or standard
dosages of medications are ineffective in reducing
symptoms.

609
Patient with PREMENSTRUAL DYSPHORIC DISORDER

A Cyclic occurrence of symptoms or signs
beginning near or after ovulation and
resolving soon after onset of menses

B Complete history

of symptoms,
medical history,
psychological
history
Physical examination

Laboratory studies
as indicated

Diagnose specific abnormality or
associated medical or psychiatric disorder

No abnormality disclosed

C Review daily symptom chart or
diagnostic form for PMDD for
at least 2 cycles

Treat or refer
as indicated

Relation of symptoms
to menses inconsistent

Relation of symptoms
to menses clear
Symptoms significantly
exacerbated in luteal phase

Symptoms may represent
exacerbation of another problem

D Initial intervention:

Education/support
Stress reduction
Healthy nutrition
Regular exercise
Relaxation techniques

Refer for other medical or psychiatric
investigation and treatment as indicated
NSAIDs/OCPs for Mastalgia/Cramps

E Symptoms do not improve or are severe or meet criteria

for PMDD or are primarily emotional/behavioral changes

SSRI
Not effective

Alprazolam (Taken in Luteal Phase)
" SSRI
Buspirone if Benzodiazepines
Contraindicated

OCPs
GnRH Agonists for
Severe Symptoms

Referral if no
improvement

References
Barnhart KT, Freeman EW, Sondheimer SJ. A clinician’s guide to the
premenstrual syndrome. Med Clin North Am 1995;79:1457.
Endicott J, Freeman EW, Kielich A, et al. PMS: new treatments that really work. Patient Care 1996;April:88.
Goodale IL, Domar AD, Benson H. Alleviation of premenstrual syndrome with the relaxation response. Obstet Gynecol 1990;75:649.

Rubinow DR, Schmidt PJ. The treatment of premenstrual syndrome:
forward into the past (editorial). N Engl J Med 1995;332:1574.
Sayegh R, Schiff I, Wurtman J, et al. The effect of a carbohydrate-rich
beverage on mood, appetite and cognitive function in women with
premenstrual syndrome. Obstet Gynecol 1995;86:520.
Severino SK, Moline ML. Premenstrual syndrome: identification and
management. Drugs 1995;49(1):71.

