PREOPERATIVE EVALUATION
Several points deserve immediate mention. First, patients
who require emergent surgery clearly do not benefit from
the delay necessary for preoperative evaluation. Second,
preoperative evaluation does not “clear” a patient for surgery and such terminology should be avoided. Preoperative evaluation provides an assessment of medical risk and
the identification of measures to reduce that risk. Third,
consultants need to have a clear understanding of their role
in patient care. Formally speaking, consultants generate
suggestions only and do not write orders. However, it is
not uncommon for surgeons to expect “co-management”
rather than formal consultation. In the latter, medical
consultants are expected to assume responsibility for all
nonsurgical matters relating to patient care.
A. Preoperative evaluation means an assessment of cardiac
risk. The goal of perioperative cardiac risk assessment
is to identify those patients with unstable cardiac disease for whom further study and treatment warrants
the risk of surgical delay. The newest guidelines from
the American College of Cardiology are summarized
in the algorithm. Stress testing is unnecessary in patients with adequate functional capacity (e.g., can walk
up a flight of stairs). Moreover, such testing should not
be recommended unless patients are willing to postpone surgery so as to proceed with cardiac revascularization. Such delay may itself be harmful in the patient
who is bedridden and thus at risk for decubitus ulcers,
aspiration pneumonia, deep vein thrombosis (DVT),
and functional decline. The use of coronary stents
mandates postoperative use of antiplatelet agents. Cessation of these agents risks in-stent restenosis. Continuation of these agents risks perioperative bleeding.
Discuss these issues with patients and their families
before ordering a stress test. The same American College of Cardiology guidelines also state that there is no
indication for routine preoperative echocardiography.
An echocardiogram is reserved for patients whose
clinical presentation is worrisome for undiagnosed
heart failure.
Recent data help guide the consultant when
faced with a positive stress test result in the preoperative period. The Coronary Artery Revascularization Prophylaxis (CARP) trial indicated that patients with stable coronary disease do not benefit
from preoperative revascularization. Exclusion criteria to this study included those with !50% left
main disease, an ejection fraction "20%, and severe aortic stenosis. This study reinforces the concept that preoperative patients fall under the same
44

guidelines for cardiac revascularization as do all
other patients.
Beta blockers are often routinely prescribed to reduce perioperative cardiac risk. However, a 2005 study
suggests that only those at high risk benefit from beta
blockers. Those at moderate risk did not benefit, and
those at low risk actually experienced increased mortality. Thus, beta blockers are recommended only in patients with established coronary artery disease (CAD)
or two or more of the following risk factors: congestive
heart failure (CHF), CAD, cardiovascular accident
(CVA), diastolic murmur (DM), or Cardiac Risk Index
(CRI) (Cr !2) who are undergoing vascular or intermediate-risk (intrathoracic, intraperitoneal, orthopedic) surgery.
B. Postoperative pulmonary complications may occur
more frequently than cardiac events. Such events
include atelectasis, bronchospasm, pneumonia, prolonged mechanical ventilation, and exacerbation of
underlying lung disease. Arozullah and colleagues have
published a respiratory failure index that predicts the
risk of respiratory failure based on the type of surgery,
patient risk factors, and functional status. However, it
is not surprising that patients with established lung
disease are at higher risk for perioperative pulmonary
complications. The role of the consultant is to identify
patients with reversible pulmonary pathology who
would benefit from preoperative intervention. Such
patients may require pulmonary evaluation via chest
x-ray, pulmonary function testing, and possibly ABG
assessment. The results of such testing can then be
used to determine disease-specific therapy, which, in
turn, minimizes postoperative complications. Those
with previously identified pulmonary pathology and
baseline symptomatology do not require investigation
or change in management. Patients undergoing lung
resection or who are likely to have a prolonged period
of mechanical ventilation benefit from early pulmonology input. All current smokers should be advised to
discontinue tobacco use (preferably at least 2 months
prior to surgery).
Endocrine disorders that are frequently encountered during preoperative evaluation include diabetes,
thyroid disease, and adrenal insufficiency. The American Diabetes Association has endorsed the following
goals for glycemic control in hospitalized patients: 90
to 130 preprandial blood sugars and "180 postprandial blood sugars. However, the bulk of the data in
favor of tight blood sugar control in hospitalized patients comes from studies performed in the intensive
(Continued on page 46)

45
Patient for PREOPERATIVE EVALUATION

B Pulmonary disease

A Cardiac disease

Thyroid, liver, or
renal disease

Unstable/severe CAD, CHF,
valvular heard disease,
arrythmia?

Cont’d on p 47

Acute infection

No

Yes

Low-risk surgery
(endoscopic,
cardiac, breast)?

Postpone surgery,
evaluate and treat
(consider cardiology
consult)

No

Yes

Good functional
capacity (can climb
a flight of stairs
without symptoms?

Proceed to
surgery

No

Yes

Calculate number
of cardiac risk
factors: CAD, CHF,
CVA, DM, CRI with
Cr !2

Proceed to
surgery

No risk factors
Proceed to
surgery

1 or more
risk factors
Stress testing if
this would change
management

Exacerbation of
COPD/asthma

Evaluate and treat
Postpone surgery

Stable
pulmonary
disease

Planned lung
resection surgery
High probability of
prolonged mechanical
ventilation
Pulmonology consult

If no improvement, consider
pharmacology consult
Proceed to surgery
Recommend:
Incentive spirometry
Laparoscopic
procedure preferred
Spinal anesthesia
preferred
Aggressive postoperative
pain control

46
care and critical care unit settings. Consultants need
to be aware that hypoglycemia may be a greater threat
than hyperglycemia in the acute setting of hospitalization. Nonetheless, there are convincing data that random blood sugars should be maintained at "200.
Metformin should be discontinued in all hospitalized
patients because of the increased risk of hypovolemia,
hypoxia, and acute renal failure–induced lactic acidosis in this setting.
C. The interpretation of thyroid tests is problematic in
acutely ill, hospitalized patients. Thus, such testing is
discouraged unless there is a high suspicion of thyroid
disease. The available data suggest that there is minimal additional surgical risk in those with mild or moderate hypothyroidism. Surgery in those with severe
hypothyroidism (i.e., thyroxine level "1 #g/dl) risks
precipitating myxedema coma. Unmanaged hyperthyroidism carries a theoretical risk of thyroid storm during surgery. Surgery should be postponed in such
patients. If surgery must be performed, then early
endocrinology input is advised.
Patients with known adrenal insufficiency and those
taking chronic high-dose steroids (i.e., !20 mg of
prednisone daily for !3 weeks) are at risk of adrenal
crisis during the perioperative period. Such patients
should receive stress dose steroids (i.e., 100 mg
hydrocortisone IV every 8 hours). This regimen should
be initiated prior to surgery and as soon as possible in
patients with significant surgical illness.
D. Patients with liver disease are at risk both from surgical
procedures and from anesthesia. Elective surgery is
considered contraindicated in those with acute hepatitis
(both viral and alcoholic), severe chronic hepatitis, and
advanced cirrhosis (i.e., Child-Pugh class C) as a result
of unacceptably high rates of perioperative mortality.
Patients with stable liver disease may proceed to surgery
after careful assessment for coagulopathy, electrolyte
abnormalities, and encephalopathy.

E. When managing patients with renal failure, because
thromboembolism is a significant cause of avoidable
hospital morbidity and mortality, consultants should
routinely recommend DVT prophylaxis with a heparinoid agent (i.e., unfractionated or low molecular weight
heparin). Those at particularly high risk for DVT (e.g.,
spinal cord injury or general surgery in those with
multiple risk factors) benefit from both pharmacologic
and nonpharmacologic measures. Nonpharmacologic
measures to reduce the incidence of DVT include
graduated compression stockings and intermittent
pneumatic compression. Note that aspirin alone is
considered insufficient thromboprophylaxis for any
category of surgical patient.
Patients should be routinely asked about alcohol intake and any prior symptoms of alcohol withdrawal.
Those deemed at risk should be placed on an alcohol
withdrawal pathway. Such pathways use either symptom-driven scales or fixed-schedule dosing for benzodiazepine administration.
References
Arozullah AM, Daley J, Henderson WG, et al. Multifactorial risk index
for predicting postoperative respiratory failure in men after major
noncardiac surgery. The National Veterans Administration Surgical
Quality Improvement Program. Ann Surg 2000;232:242.
Clement S, Braithwaite SS, Magee MF, et al. Management of diabetes
and hyperglycemia in hospitals. Diabetes Care 2004;27(2):553–591.
Fleisher LA, Beckman JA, Brown KA. ACC/AHA 2007 Guidelines on
Perioperative Cardiovascular Evaluation and Care for Noncardiac
Surgery: Executive Summary. A Report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice
Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol 2007;50:e159–241.
Geerts WH, Pineo GF, Heit JA, et al. Prevention of venous thromboembolism: the Seventh ACCP Conference on Antithrombotic and
Thrombolytic Therapy. Chest 2004;126:338S–400S.
Lindenauer PK, Pekow P, Wang K, et al. Perioperative beta-blocker
therapy and mortality after major noncardiac surgery. N Engl J Med
2005;353:349–361.
McFalls EO, Ward HB, Moritz TE, et al. Coronary-artery revascularization
before elective major vascular surgery. N Engl J Med 2004;351:
2795–2804.

47
Patient for PREOPERATIVE EVALUATION
(Cont’d from p 45)

C Thyroid disease

D Liver disease

E Renal disease

Asses thyroid status

Mild/moderate
hypothyroidism
Initiate thyroxine
therapy
Proceed to surgery

Severe
hypothyroidism

Hyperthyroidism

Acute renal
failure

Initiate thyroxine
therapy
Consider T3
replacement
Postpone surgery
Postpone surgery
if possible until
treated
If surgery cannot
be postponed,
obtain endocrinology
consult

Stable chronic
renal failure

Evaluate
and treat
Postpone
surgery
Assess electrolytes,
volume status,
and hematocrit
Correct as necessary
Note Cr !2 considered
an intermediate
predictor of increased
cardiac risk
Proceed to
surgery

Acute hepatitis
Evaluate and treat
Postpone surgery

Severe/chronic
hepatitis
Child-Pugh class
C cirrhosis

Mild/moderate
chronic hepatitis
Child-Pugh class
A/B cirrhosis

Consider alternatives Assess electrolytes,
coagulation parameters,
to surgery
hematocrit, hepatic,
Proceed to surgery
encephalopathy and
with extreme caution
volume status
Correct as necessary
When optimized,
proceed to surgery

Dialysis patients
Consult nephrology

