PREVENTION AND SCREENING
A. Screening is defined as the examination of a group of
asymptomatic individuals to detect those with a given
disease or risk factor. This is typically done by the
means of an inexpensive diagnostic service. The service can take many forms, including history taking,
physical examination, laboratory testing, and other
procedures. The discussion that follows applies to a
patient at average risk. Different sets of recommendations apply to those who are at higher-than-average risk
for a selected disease or risk factor.
B. The United States Preventive Services Task Force
(USPSTF) has created a grading system for its recommendations. The grading system is based on the
strength of the supporting evidence and the size of the
net benefit (benefits minus harms).
• Grade A. The USPSTF strongly recommends that
clinicians provide [the service] to eligible patients.
The UPSTF found good evidence that [the service]
improves important health outcomes and concludes
that benefits substantially outweigh harms.
• Grade B. The USPSTF recommends that clinicians
provide [the service] to eligible patients. The UPSTF
found at least fair evidence that [the service]
improves important health outcomes and concludes
that benefits outweigh harms.
• Grade C. The USPSTF makes no recommendations
for or against routine provision of [the service]. The
UPSTF found at least fair evidence that [the service]
can improve health outcomes but concludes that the
balance of benefits and harms is too close to justify a
general recommendation.
• Grade D. The USPSTF recommends against routinely providing [the service] to asymptomatic patients. The UPSTF found at least fair evidence that
[the service] is ineffective or that harm outweighs
benefits.
• Grade I. The USPSTF concludes that the evidence
is insufficient to recommend for or against routinely
providing [the service]. Evidence that [the service]
is effective is lacking, of poor quality, or conflicting,
and the balance of benefits and harms cannot be determined.
The Canadian Task Force for Preventive Health
Care (CTFPHC) has also created a grading system for
its recommendations. Grades A and B are similar to the
USPSTF grading system. Grade C states that there is
insufficient evidence regarding inclusion or exclusion of
the condition or maneuver in a periodic health examination, but recommendations may be made on other
grounds. Grade D states that there is fair evidence to
2

support the recommendation that the condition or maneuver be specifically excluded from a periodic health
examination. Grade E states that there is good evidence
to support the recommendation that the condition or
maneuver be specifically excluded from a periodic health
examination.
The remainder of this discussion will focus on the
details of the recommended preventive services (i.e.,
those that have been given Grade A or B recommendations by the UPSTF) along with the more controversial
prostate cancer screening service.
C. Alcohol misuse screening: The USPSTF and the CTFPHC both recommend screening and behavioral
counseling interventions to reduce alcohol misuse by
adults in the primary care setting (Grade B). The term
alcohol misuse refers to “risky/hazardous” and “harmful” drinking. “Risky” or “hazardous” drinking has
been defined in the United States, for women, as !7
drinks per week or !3 drinks per occasion and, for
men, as !14 drinks per week or !4 drinks per occasion. “Harmful” drinking is used to describe persons
who are currently experiencing physical, social, or
psychological harm from alcohol use but who do not
meet dependence criteria. Screening and interventions for alcohol dependence were not evaluated by
the USPSTF because these benefits have already been
well established. The Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT) is the most studied screening
tool for detecting alcohol-related problems in primary
care settings. The CAGE questionnaire is the most
popular screening test used to detect alcohol abuse or
dependence in the primary care setting. The optimal
interval for screening and intervention is uncertain,
but should probably be based at least in part on previous responses.
Breast cancer screening: The USPSTF recommends
screening mammography, with or without clinical
breast examination, every 1–2 years for women aged
"40 (Grade B). Controversy exists over the appropriate interval for screening, especially in women in the
40- to 49-year age group. The American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommends
screening every 1–2 years in this age group and annually in women aged "50. The American Cancer Society (ACS) recommends annual mammography in
women !40 years of age. The Canadian guidelines
state that there is good evidence for screening women
aged 50–69 years by clinical examination and mammography (Grade A) and that the best available data
support screening every 1–2 years. They also state that

3
current evidence does not support the recommendation that screening mammography be included in or
excluded from the periodic health examination or
women aged 40–49 years at average risk of breast cancer (Grade C). The precise age to discontinue screening is not known, mostly because controlled trials have
not enrolled older females and there are no data available. Most organizations agree that older women are as
likely to benefit from screening as younger women,
provided that they have no comorbid conditions that
limit their life expectancy. The USPSTF concludes
that the evidence is insufficient to recommend for or
against teaching or performing routine breast self-examination (BSE or CBE) (Grade I). The ACS recommends CBE at least every 3 years in young women and
annually in women !40 years. They also suggest that
from the 20s, women should be offered instruction in
BSE but that it is acceptable for patients to choose not
to perform them.
Cervical cancer screening: The USPSTF strongly
recommends screening women for cervical cancer if
they have a cervix and have been sexually active (Grade
A). The optimal age to begin screening is unknown,
but the ACS guidelines suggest that age 21 years or 3
years after the onset of sexual activity may be appropriate. Most U.S. organizations agree that cervical cancer
screening can be discontinued safely in the elderly
population; however, the appropriate age is again uncertain. The USPSTF recommends against screening
women !65 years of age if they have had adequate
recent screening with normal results and are not otherwise at high risk (Grade D). The ACS suggests that
it may be appropriate to stop at age 70 years, but they
suggest that women should have at least 3 consecutive,
documented normal results and no abnormal test results within the past 10 years. The USPSTF also found
no direct evidence to support that annual screening
leads to better outcomes than does screening every
3 years. However, most organizations recommend that
annual screening be continued until a certain number
(usually 2–3) test results are normal before the interval
is lengthened. Additionally, the ACS recommends
waiting until at least age 30 before increasing the
interval. Most organizations agree that it is safe to
discontinue screening after hysterectomy for benign
disease. At this point, the USPSTF concludes that
there is insufficient evidence to recommend for or
against the routine use of human papillomavirus
testing as a method for cervical cancer screening
(Grade I). The CTFPHC agrees that there is fair evidence to include Pap smears in the periodic health
examination of sexually active women (Grade B).
Colorectal cancer screening: The USPSTF strongly
recommends that clinicians screen men and women
"50 years for colorectal cancer (Grade A), although
they do not specify the acceptable methods. The ACS
suggests that the following are acceptable potential
screening options: (1) annual home fecal occult blood

testing (FOBT), three specimens; (2) flexible sigmoidoscopy every 5 years; (3) annual FOBT plus flexible
sigmoidoscopy every 5 years; (4) double contrast barium enema every 5 years; and (5) colonoscopy every
10 years. It should be mentioned that a stool sample
collected in the office by digital rectal examination is
not an acceptable substitute for home FOBT. In addition, the combination of FOBT and flexible sigmoidoscopy is preferable to either of these tests alone. The
age of discontinuation is again not clear, but most organizations agree that it should be decided based on
comorbid conditions that limit life expectancy. The
Canadian guidelines recommend including annual or
biennial FOBT (Grade A) and flexible sigmoidoscopy
(Grade B) in the periodic health examination of
patients >50 years. They do report that there is insufficient evidence to make recommendations about the
combination of these screening tests or about the use
of colonoscopy (Grade C).
Chlamydial and gonorrhea infection screening: The
USPSTF strongly recommends that clinicians routinely screen all sexually active women #25 years for
chlamydial infection (Grade A) and gonorrheal infection (Grade B). This assumes that women in this age
group are at higher risk because of their young age.
They also state that there is insufficient evidence to
recommend for or against routinely screening asymptomatic men for chlamydial or gonorrheal infection
even if they are at increased risk (Grade I). They make
no recommendations for or against screening for chlamydia in women who are at low risk for infection
(Grade C), and they recommend against routine
screening for gonorrheal infections in men or women
who are at low risk for infection (Grade D). Screening
intervals should depend on previous results and
changes in sexual behaviors. The Canadian guidelines
state that there is fair evidence to support annual
screening of this group (Grade B) and fair evidence to
exclude routine screening of the general population
(Grade D).
Depression screening: The USPSTF and the CTFPHC both recommend screening adults for depression
in clinical practices that have systems in place to ensure
accurate diagnosis, effective treatment, and follow-up
(Grade B). Several formal screening tools are available,
including the Zung Self-Assessment Depression Scale,
the Beck Depression Inventory, the General Health
Questionnaire, and the Center for Epidemiologic Study
Depression Scale. There is little evidence to recommend one screening tool over another, so practitioners
should choose the one that fits best with their personal
preference, the patient population they serve, and their
practice setting. Again, the ideal interval for screening is
not known but should probably be based at least in part
on previous responses.
High blood pressure screening: The USPSTF strongly
recommends that clinicians screen adults "18 years for
high blood pressure (Grade A). The CTFPHC also

4
concludes that there is fair evidence to include measurement of blood pressure in periodic health examinations (Grade B). Evidence is lacking for the appropriate
interval for screening but the seventh report of the
Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection,
Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure
(JNC 7) suggests that every 2 years for those with systolic blood pressure $130 mm Hg and diastolic blood
pressure $85 mm Hg may be appropriate.
Lipid disorder screening: The USPSTF strongly recommends that clinicians routinely screen men "35
years and women "45 years for lipid disorders and treat
abnormal lipids in people who are at increased risk for
coronary heart disease (Grade A). It makes no recommendation for or against routine screening in younger
adults (men aged 20–35 years or women aged 20–45
years) in the absence of known risk factors for coronary
heart disease (Grade C). It recommends that screening
for lipid disorders include measurement of total cholesterol and high-density lipoprotein (Grade B) but concludes that there is insufficient evidence to recommend
for or against the inclusion of triglyceride measurement
for routine screening(Grade I). The optimal interval for
screening is unknown, but on the basis of expert opinion
and other guidelines, every 5 years is believed to be a
reasonable option. The ATP III (Adult Treatment
Panel), the expert panel created by the National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP), suggests that all
adults "20 years have a fasting lipid panel once every
5 years. However, the CTFPHC reports that there is
insufficient evidence that the measurement of blood
total cholesterol should be included in or excluded from
the periodic health examination (Grade C). They do,
however, suggest that although it has not evaluated for
its effectiveness, screening should be considered in all
men aged 30–59 years and that individual clinical judgment should be exercised in all other cases.
Immunizations: The Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC) recommends annual influenza vaccine for all persons "50 years and persons
in selected high-risk groups. Pneumococcal vaccine
is recommended for all immunocompetent individuals who are "65 years or otherwise at increased risk
for pneumococcal disease. A revaccination with
MMR (measles, mumps, rubella) is also recommended for those students entering a postsecondary
educational institution. Additionally, a one-dose
booster of the tetanus vaccination is recommended
for adults every 10 years.
Obesity screening: The USPSTF recommends that
clinicians screen all adult patients for obesity and offer
intensive counseling and behavioral interventions to promote sustained weight loss for adults who are obese
(Grade B). They state that there is insufficient evidence
to recommend for or against behavioral counseling to
promote a healthy diet or physical activity in unselected
patients in the primary care setting (Grade I). Clinicians
may use waist circumference or body mass index (BMI)

as measure of obesity. The CTFPHC states that there is
fair evidence to support providing general dietary advice
and recommending that individuals engage in the
regular practice of moderate-intensity physical activity
(Grade B). However, it also states that because of the
lack of evidence supporting long-term effectiveness of
weight-reduction interventions, there is insufficient evidence to recommend for or against BMI measurement
as part of the periodic health examination (Grade C).
Osteoporosis screening: The USPSTF recommends
that women "65 years be screened routinely for osteoporosis and that routine screening begin at age 60 years
in women who are at increased risk for osteoporotic
fractures (Grade B). They make no recommendations
for or against osteoporosis screening in postmenopausal
women who are $60 years or in women aged 60–64
years who are not at increased risk for osteoporotic
fractures (Grade C). The ACOG recommends that clinicians offer bone mineral density (BMD) testing to
women "65 years and younger postmenopausal women
with one or more risk factors (except being white, postmenopausal, and female). Lower body weight ($70 kg)
is the single best predictor of low bone mineral density.
Additional risk factors that are commonly considered
(although with less supporting evidence) include smoking, weight loss, family history, decreased physical activity, alcohol or caffeine use, and low calcium and vitamin
D intake. Bone density measured at the femoral neck
by dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) is the
best predictor of hip fracture and is comparable to forearm measurements for predicting fractures at other
sites. No studies have evaluated the optimal interval to
repeat screening. Two years is often thought of as the
minimum appropriate interval based on the limitations
in the precision of testing and the fact that at least that
long is needed to reliably measure a change in BMD.
There are no data regarding the appropriate age to stop
screening. The CTFPHC agrees that there is fair evidence supporting screening postmenopausal women
with a history of previous fracture, those who are "65
years, and women who have risk factors (as measured
by high scores on the Osteoporosis Risk Assessment
Instrument [ORAI]) to prevent fragility fractures
(Grade B). The ORAI incorporates low weight, no current use of estrogen, and age into a three-item score.
The CTFPHC found that there is good evidence to
recommend using the ORAI to predict low BMD
(Grade A) and fair evidence to recommend using BMD
testing to predict fractures (Grade B).
Tobacco use screening: The USPSTF and CTFPHC
both strongly recommend that clinicians screen all
adults for tobacco use and provide tobacco cessation
interventions for those who use tobacco products
(Grade A).
Prostate cancer screening: The USPSTF concludes
that the evidence is insufficient to recommend for or
against routine screening for prostate cancer using
prostate-specific antigen (PSA) testing or digital rectal

5
Patient for PREVENTIVE HEALTH SERVICES

A Screening
B Grading system
C Preventive services

Age 18–24

Age 25–39

Age 40–49

Age 50–64

Age "65

Male

Female

Male

Female

Male

Female

Male

Female

Male

MMR
Cervical
cancer
MMR
Sexually
transmitted
diseases

Cervical
cancer

Lipids

Breast
cancer
Cervical
cancer
Lipids

Lipids

Breast
cancer
Cervical
cancer
Colon
cancer
Influenza
Lipids

Colon
cancer
Influenza
Lipids
Prostate
cancer

Breast
cancer
Colon
cancer
Influenza
Lipids
Osteoporosis
Pneumovax

Colon
cancer
Influenza
Lipids
Pneumovax
Prostate
cancer

Female

examination (DRE) (Grade I). There is good evidence
that PSA can detect early prostate cancer but inconclusive evidence that the currently available treatments
decrease morbidity and mortality from early prostate
cancer. PSA screening is more sensitive than DRE for
the detection of early prostate cancer. Clinicians are
advised that they should not order a PSA without first
discussing with the patient the potential but uncertain
benefits and the possible harms. If it is true that early
detection improves health outcomes, then those most
likely to benefit are men aged 50–70 who are at average
risk. The CTFPHC found poor evidence to include or
exclude DRE (Grade C) and fair evidence to exclude
PSA screening (Grade D) from the periodic health examination of asymptomatic men !50 years of age. They
state that this recommendation is made based on the
poor positive predictive value and the known risk of
adverse effects associated with therapies of unproved
effectiveness.
For access to the most recent recommendations from
various organizations, please go to www.guidelines.gov.
This is the website for the National Guideline Clearinghouse (NGC), a public resource for evidence-based
clinical practice guidelines. NGC is an initiative of the
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) of
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

References
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practice, American Academy of
Family Physicians. General recommendations on immunization.
MMWR Recomm Rep 2002;51(RR-2):1–36.
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG). Breast
cancer screening. Washington, DC: ACOG 2003 (ACOG practice bulletin; no. 42).
Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care. www.ctfphc.org
Guide to Clinical Preventive Services, 2005. AHRQ Publication No. 050570, June 2005. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, Rockville,
MD. http://www.ahrq.gov/clinic/pocketgd.htm.
Harper SA, Fukuda K, Uyeki TM, et al. Prevention and control of influenza. Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization
Practices (ACIP). MMWR Recomm Rep 2005;54(RR-8):1–40.
National Osteoporosis Foundation. Physician’s guide to prevention and
treatment of osteoporosis. Washington, DC: National Osteoporosis
Foundation, 2003.
Smith RA, Cokkinides V, Eyre HJ. American Cancer Society guidelines for
the early detection of cancer, 2003. CA Cancer J Clin 2003;53(1):27–43.
Smith RA, Saslow D, Sawyer LA, et al. American Cancer Society guidelines for breast cancer screening: update 2003. CA Cancer J Clin
2003;53(3):141–169.

