PROSTATITIS


A. Prostatitis is inflammation of the prostate gland that
encompasses a spectrum of clinical disease. The most
common presentation is recurrent dysuria with irritative and obstructive urinary symptoms in the absence of
bacterial infection. Specific complaints may include
perineal pain, low back pain, suprapubic pain, dysuria,
frequency, urgency, nocturia, straining, weak stream,
hesitancy, and a sense of incomplete bladder emptying.
The differential diagnosis for prostatitis includes sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), urinary tract infections, genitourinary malignancy, urolithiasis, urethral
stricture, and neurogenic bladder. Workup for all cases
of prostatitis begins with a focused history and physical
examination, including sexual history, urinalysis, and
urine culture. Based on a patient’s risk factors, further
studies may include urethral cultures for gonorrhea and
chlamydia, testing for herpes and HIV, serum creatinine, serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA), postvoid
residual recording, voided urine cytology, CT scan, cystoscopy, transrectal ultrasound of the prostate (TRUS),
and urodynamics.
B. Hematuria warrants workup for urolithiasis, genitourinary malignancy, and urinary tract infection. Significant hematuria is defined as !3 RBCs per high-power
field (hpf) on two of three voided urine specimens,
"100 RBCs/hpf on any urinary specimen, or gross
hematuria.
C. Acute bacterial prostatitis, a bacterial infection of the
prostate of sudden onset, represents 2%–5% of prostatitis cases. Typically, patients are sexually active men
#35 years, presenting with perineal or suprapubic
pain, urethral discharge, obstructive urinary symptoms, and systemic signs of infection. Transmission can
be sexual from Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Chlamydia
trachomatis or by direct extension of Escherichia coli
from the lower urinary tract or rectum.
D. Chronic bacterial prostatitis, a recurrent or persistent
bacterial infection of the prostate, represents 2%–5%
of prostatitis cases. Typically, patients are older men,
presenting with intermittent and milder symptoms of
dysuria than those with acute bacterial prostatitis.

566

On examination, the prostate is tender and boggy
with suprapubic tenderness during acute episodes of
prostatitis. The most common causative organism is
E. coli; other organisms include Enterobacteriaceae,
enterococci, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Start empiric treatment with 8–16 weeks of trimethoprim/
sulfamethoxazole (TMP) or quinolone antibiotics.
Symptomatic control may be achieved with alpha
blockers, anticholinergics, NSAIDs, and sitz baths.
Consider surgical management with transurethral
resection of the prostate (TURP) in men with prostate calculi, prostatic abscess, or persistent prostatitis
after extensive medical management.
E. Chronic pelvic pain syndrome represents 90%–95% of
prostatitis cases and is a diagnosis of exclusion. This
syndrome is defined as genitourinary pain in the absence of identifiable infection, malignancy, urethral
structure, and neurologic dysfunction. Proposed mechanisms include nonbacterial infection, reflux of urine into
the ejaculatory ducts, and autoimmune disease. Possible
infectious agents include Trichomonas vaginalis, Chlamydia trachomatis, Ureaplasma urealyticum, cytomegalovirus, and Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Empiric treatment begins with trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole or
quinolone antibiotics for 6–8 weeks. If there is no response, consider 4–6 weeks of doxycycline or metronidazole. For severe symptoms, patients can be started
with some combination of alpha blockers, anticholinergics, narcotics, NSAIDs, tricyclics, and allopurinol.
Other supportive measures include sitz baths, avoidance
of alcohol and caffeine, prostatic message, pelvic floor
exercises, stress reduction, and biofeedback.
Refrences
Meares EM Jr: Prostatitis and related disorders. In Walsh PC, Retik AB,
Vaughan ED, Wein AJ (eds): Campell’s Urology, 7th ed. Philadelphia,
WB Saunders, 1998, pp 615–530.
Nickel JC: Effective office management of chornic prostatitis. Urol Clin
North Am 1998;25:677–684
Nickel JC, Moon T: Chronic bacterial prostatitis: an evolving clinical
enigma. Urology 2005;66:2–8.

567
Patient with PROSTATITIS

A History and physical examination
Urinalysis % urine culture
Urethral culture (if $ risk factors for STD)

B Hematuria

$ Urine culture or
$ urethral culture

Consider:
Bladder cancer
Urolithiasis

C Infection resolved
with antibiotics

Consider:
Acute bacterial prostatitis
Urinary tract infection

D Recurrent or

persistent infection

Consider:
Chronic bacterial
prostatitis
Prostate abscess

E Urinalysis negative for

infection and blood
Urethral culture negative

Exclude:
Urethral stricture
Genital herpes
Benign prostatic hypertrophy
Neurogenic bladder
Genitourinary malignancy

Consider:
Chronic pelvic
pain syndrome

