PSYCHOSIS


A psychotic episode is typified by deranged thinking,
speech, and behavior, often manifesting as hallucinations
(false sensory impressions: visual, auditory, olfactory, gustatory, tactile), delusions (false fixed beliefs), difficulty
distinguishing reality from fantasy, disorganized thinking,
and strange and inappropriate behavior.
A. When confronted with a patient who is acutely
psychotic, the first task is to ensure the safety of the
patient and others against injury or possible death. A
calm, low-stimulus environment with nonthreatening
behavior by staff is essential. Physical force should not
be threatened unless overwhelming force is available.
The patient should not be left alone, and an examining
physician should be accompanied by at least one
other person. Some patients may need to be restrained
chemically and/or physically. Patients should be
questioned about any thoughts of suicide or injuring
others, which must be taken extremely seriously,
especially if the hallucinations are auditory and are of
a command type.
B. A medical history is essential in the evaluation of a patient who is psychotic. Given the patient’s mental status,
the most valuable information will probably come from

672

others who know him or her. Inquire about the time
course of the emerging bizarre behavior and possible
relation to any preexisting or acute medical conditions,
recent-onset physical symptoms, exposure to infectious
or toxic agents, medication use, drug abuse, recent surgery, or physical or psychological trauma.
C. Possible medical causes of acute psychotic behavior
should be considered and ruled out immediately.
Despite the difficulties, perform as complete a physical
examination as possible, including pupils and, to the
extent possible, fundi. Examine carefully the patient’s
entire body for evidence of trauma, substance abuse,
or any other medical condition. Staring or stereotypic
motor behavior may suggest a drug-induced or
seizure-related state, and obtaining an electroencephalogram may be advisable.
D. Address such readily treatable (and potentially hazardous) conditions as hypoglycemia by such means as
immediate drawing of blood followed by IV injection
of a concentrated dextrose solution.
E. If the history (usually from others), a careful physical
examination, and indicated laboratory tests fail to reveal
any organic causes of psychosis, consider a psychiatric
differential diagnosis.
(Continued on page 674)

673
PSYCHOTIC PATIENT

A Ensure safety of patient and others
Restrain if necessary

B History

Usually from family
and significant others
Physical examination
may require restraint
of patient

Indicated laboratory tests

C Consider metabolic, neurologic,
or toxic etiology:
Hypoglycemia
Electrolyte or endocrine
dysfunction
Seizure disorder
Intracranial bleeding
Cerebral tumor
Drug intoxication

Organic cause found

D Treat condition as appropriate

Place patient in secure setting
Sedate if necessary
Diminish stimuli

No organic cause found

E Psychiatric differential
diagnosis (by history
and mental status
examination)

Cont’d on p 675

674
F. Schizophrenia is a lifelong chronic condition marked
by acute psychotic episodes interspersed with periods
of less disturbed but still abnormal behavior. Between
episodes, people with schizophrenia often show poor
motivation, social awkwardness, and isolation. Acute
schizophrenic episodes are typically treated with antipsychotic agents, which usually are maintained at
lower dosages to mitigate the likelihood and severity of
future episodes. Now, more patients with schizophrenia
are taking newer-generation antipsychotic drugs such
as clozapine (Clozaril), risperidone (Risperdal), olanzapine (Zyprexa), and quetiapine (Seroquel). It is unclear whether these drugs are as able as traditional
antipsychotic medications to suppress acutely emergent
psychotic behavior. Moreover, to date, newer agents do
not come in parenteral form. Use benzodiazepine sedation as needed as an adjunct to antipsychotic drugs
during acute episodes, especially when the patient
presents as a danger to self and others.
G. Mania often presents as an acute psychosis. A history
typically reveals past episodes of mania or major
depression. A mental status examination shows the
patient to have grandiose ideas and be highly excited,
emotionally labile, overtalkative, pressured in speech,
and hypersexual. Acute treatment consists of antipsychotic drugs as needed, often with adjunctive lithium.
Divalproex (Depakote) increasingly is being used to
suppress acute symptoms of mania. Lithium is the
mainstay therapy for most patients who are bipolar
(manic-depressive). The mood stabilizer olanzapine
(Zyprexa) is also effective in preventing manic and
mixed-episode relapse/recurrence in patients acutely
stabilized with olanzapine and lithium cotreatment.
Both agents are comparable in preventing depression
relapse/recurrence. Carbamazepine (Tegretol and others) and newer anticonvulsants (notably gabapentin
[Neurontin] and lamotrigine [Lamictal]) are coming
into use also. Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) usually
is effective for patients who fail to benefit or cannot
tolerate these medications. Benzodiazepines can be
used adjunctively to control an acute episode.

H. Psychotic depression may become manifest either as
a recurrent mood disorder itself or as an episode in
the course of a bipolar illness. Delusions and hallucinations commonly manifest such depressive themes as
guilt and punishment. Effective treatments include
ECT and combined antipsychotic and antidepressant
drugs. Clozapine and possibly other new antipsychotics
may be especially helpful in treating psychotic
depression. Guard against suicide, an omnipresent
hazard in these patients. In March 2004 the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration warned physicians and patients regarding increased risk of suicide with 10 newer
antidepressant drugs. However, available data do not
indicate a significant increase in risk of suicide or
serious suicide attempt after starting treatment with
these newer antidepressant drugs.
I. Delusional (paranoid) disorder is a chronic condition
characterized by a fixed and focused delusional system
in the midst of otherwise-intact thinking. It often is
refractory to biologic and psychologic treatments.
J. Patients with dementia often manifest psychotic behaviors that can complicate long-term management.
Rule out acute medical conditions, and, if possible,
handle disruptive behaviors through behavioral and
environmental means. If this is not possible, low dosages of antipsychotic drugs may assist management.
References
American Psychiatric Association. Treatment of Psychiatric Disorders: A
Task Force of the American Psychiatric Association. Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Association, 1989:1485, 1655, 1725.
Gelenberg AJ, Keith SJ. Psychosis. In Gelenberg AJ, Bassak EL,
eds. The Practitioner’s Guide to Psychoactive Drugs, 4th ed. New York:
Plenum, 1997.
Kaplan HI, Sadock BJ, eds. Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry, 6th
ed. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1994.
Practice guideline for the psychiatric evaluation of adults, 2nd ed. Am J
Psychiatry 2006;163(6 Suppl):3–36
Simon GE, Savarino J, Operskalski B, et al. Suicide risk during antidepressant treatment. Am J Psychiatry 2006;163:41.
Tohen M, Greil W, Calabrese JR, et al. Olanzapine versus lithium in the
maintenance treatment of bipolar disorder: a 12-month, randomized,
double-blind, controlled clinical trial. Am J Psychiatry 2005;162:1281.

675
PSYCHOTIC PATIENT
(Cont’d from p 673)

F Schizophrenia

G Acute mania

H Psychotic

Chronic course
Usually begins in
adolescence
Behavior never
returns to
normal
Bizarre thoughts
and behavior,
often suspicious
Social awkwardness
even when not
psychotic

History of previous
episodes of
mania and
depression with
intervening
periods of
normalcy
Excited behavior,
overtalkative and
pressured speech
Grandiose delusions
Hypersexuality

History of
previous
mood episodes
Intervening
periods of
normalcy
Hallucinations
and delusions
consistent with
depressive
themes

Acute Treatment
with Antipsychotic
Drugs and
Benzodiazepines
for Sedation

Antipsychotic Drugs,
Probably Lithium
(Usually Effective
in Maintenance
Therapy), or
Possibly Other
Anticonvulsants
(e.g., Divalproex)
Often Adjunctive
Benzodiazepines

Maintenance Therapy
with Same Agents
at Lower Dosages

Consider:
ECT
Benzodiazepines

depression

I Delusional
disorder

Usually chronic
Thinking may
be intact
except for
fixed, usually
paranoid
delusion

Consider:
ECT
Combined
antipsychotic
and
antidepressant
Clozapine and
perhaps other newer
antipsychotic drugs

Usually
difficult
to treat

J Dementia
Diagnosis
established
If possible,
manage
behaviorally:
Low stimulation
Consistent
environment
Consider low
dosages of
antipsychotics

