Raynaud's phenomenon is defined by episodic ischemia of the digits in response to cold or emotional stimuli. The three stages of Raynaud's include pallor, cyanosis, and rubor. Pallor is caused by vasospasm and loss of arterial blood flow, cyanosis reveals the deoxygenation of static venous blood, and rubor shows the reactive hyperemia following return of blood flow. Prevalence in the United States ranges between 4% and 11% in women and 3% and 8% in men, depending on the population studied. Severity can range from mild intermittent symptoms to severe persistent ischemia with ulceration of digits.

A. A thorough history should be obtained to differentiate true Raynaud's phenomenon from common cold intolerance. Classic Raynaud's is described as the sudden onset of cold fingers (or toes) in association with a sharply demarcated triphasic (white-blue-red) color change. It is usually symmetric, and asymmetry should prompt investigation of traumatic etiology or thrombotic/embolic phenomenon. In addition, symptoms of associated conditions should be sought by taking a complete review of systems. A complete medication history and an occupational exposure history are critical.
B. A complete physical examination is warranted to investigate for signs of an associated underlying condition. It is not necessary to perform provocative tests because they are often inaccurate. Nailfold capillary microscopy can be performed by placing a drop of grade B immersion oil on the patient's skin at the base of the fingernail and viewing the area with a handheld ophthalmoscope set at 10–40 diopters; capillaries of patients with an underlying rheumatic disease are frequently distorted and irregular.
C. Raynaud's phenomenon is considered primary if the symptoms occur without evidence of any associated disorder. Primary Raynaud's is more common in women than in men and usually starts at a younger age. The episodes are characterized by symmetric attacks with the absence of tissue necrosis, ulceration, or gangrene. For primary Raynaud's, the avoidance of cold temperatures and keeping the entire body warm is often sufficient therapy. In addition, avoiding vasoconstrictive medications, tobacco, and caffeine can be helpful. When conservative therapy is insufficient, long-acting calcium channel blockers can be tried.
D. Many medications have been implicated in Raynaud's phenomenon, including beta blockers, chemotherapeutic agents, interferon, estrogen, nicotine, narcotics, sympathomimetic agents, cyclosporine, cocaine, ergotamines, and clonidine. In addition, exposure to polyvinyl chloride and heavy metals has been associated with Raynaud's phenomenon. Withdrawal of offending medications and conservative therapy as for primary Raynaud's phenomenon should be attempted.
E. Raynaud's secondary to an underlying disease should be suspected in a patient with associated symptoms or signs, in those with new Raynaud's phenomenon after 40 years of age, or in those with severe ischemia or ulceration. In this population, guided by the history and physical examination, one could perform a CBC, general blood chemical analysis, urinalysis, ANA, C3, C4, ESR, C-reactive protein (CRP), and rheumatoid factor (RF). Further testing for cryoglobulins and serum protein electrophoresis (SPEP) can be ordered as well. As with primary Raynaud's, the avoidance of cold temperatures and keeping the entire body warm is recommended. In addition, avoiding vasoconstrictive medications, tobacco, and caffeine can be helpful. When conservative therapy is insufficient, long-acting calcium channel blockers can be tried. For cases of severe ischemia or digital necrosis, arterial studies should be performed and antiplatelet therapy and IV prostaglandins should be initiated.
F. Asymmetric Raynaud's should raise the suspicion for trauma or thrombotic or embolic phenomenon. Raynaud's secondary to trauma can occur when the ulnar artery is damaged as it courses the hook of the hamate bone in the wrist (“hypothenar hammer syndrome”). Hand-arm vibration exposure, as occurs with pneumatic hammer operators, can also cause a similar phenomenon. In asymmetric Raynaud's, thrombotic and embolic disease should also be considered. Allen's test should be performed. Doppler ultrasonography may be useful, but arteriography is the "gold standard."

