RENAL CYSTS AND MASSES

Ana R. Stankovic, MD, and Ajay K. Singh, MBBS, FRCP

A. Hematuria, palpable abdominal mass, and flank pain
are the most common clinical manifestations in a
patient with a detectable renal lesion. The widespread
use of ultrasound (US) and CT scanning has led to an
increased detection of renal lesions. The chance of
finding an incidental renal mass on CT scan is 33% for
patients !50 years of age. With symptoms of hematuria, palpable abdominal mass, or flank pain, the evaluation should begin with an US and/or CT scan. The
test sensitivity of a renal US to detect parenchymal
masses is 79%. The renal US does not detect masses
"5 mm in diameter. Therefore, a renal CT scan with
contrast medium should be performed when visualization is inadequate on the US; the mass is small ("1 cm
in diameter); or US examination shows evidence of
calcifications, septa, or multiple cysts.
B. Most renal lesions are initially discovered on US.
US criteria for the classification of simple renal cyst
include: (1) spherical or ovoid shape; (2) absence of
internal echoes; (3) presence of a thin, smooth wall
that is separate from the surrounding parenchyma; and
(4) enhancement of the posterior wall, indicating
US transmission through the water-filled cyst. If all of
these criteria are satisfied and the patient is asymptomatic, no further evaluation of the cyst is necessary
because the likelihood of a malignancy is very small.
Simple renal cysts are the most common renal masses,

occurring in 50% of patients !50 years of age. Symptomatic patients with the same US findings should
undergo CT scanning with contrast. The “gold standard” for evaluating renal masses requires CT images
"5 mm in thickness before and after contrast is given.
The criteria for diagnosing a benign cyst on CT scan
include: (1) a homogeneous attenuation value near that
of water, (2) no enhancement with IV contrast material, (3) no measurable thickness of the cyst wall, and
(4) smooth interface with renal parenchyma. MRI is
typically used to evaluate patients with indeterminate
lesions. MRI does not detect calcifications. The suspicion for malignancy should be raised if the benign
criteria are not met, calcification is present within
a cyst, or repeat studies show an enlarging lesion.
CT scan has a sensitivity of 94% for detection of renal
parenchymal masses, but MRI is statistically superior
to CT scan in the correct characterization of benign
lesions. If a cyst meets the criteria for being benign,
periodic reevaluation is the standard of care. If the
lesion is not consistent with a simple cyst, surgical
exploration is recommended.
C. Acquired renal cystic disease occurs in as many as
90% of patients who receive dialysis for 5–10 years.
The cysts develop as a consequence of chronic renal
insufficiency and may be clinically apparent long
before dialysis is instituted.
(Continued on page 370)

Key Ultrasonographic Features of the Kidney in Health and Disease
Normal Kidney
• Each kidney measures 10–12 cm in length.
• The renal parenchyma is usually isoechoic compared to the liver or
spleen.
• The renal sinuses are hyperechoic.
Hyperechoic Parenchyma Suggests “Medical Disease of the
Kidneys”
• Differential diagnosis includes acute or chronic glomerular nephritis,
interstitial nephritis, acute rejection, and infiltrative diseases of the
kidney (lymphoma, amyloid, etc). Lymphoma most commonly shows
rounded hypoechoic masses.
Renal Masses
• 90% of cysts are cortical.
• Cysts become more prevalent with increasing age (in the elderly 1–5
cysts in each kidney are common).
• Simple cysts are smooth, walled structures with distinct anterior and
posterior walls and no internal echoes. Posterior acoustic enhancement is often seen.
• Suspect malignant cysts if they are septated or nodular or have thick
irregular walls. Thick septations also warrants suspicion of malignancy.

368

• Solid renal masses: 85% of renal masses are renal cell cancers.
• Renal tumors may be hyperechoic or hypoechoic.
• Approximately 10% of renal tumors are amorphous in appearance and
have evidence of calcification.
• Lymphoma should be suspected if there are multiple hypoechoic
masses; it is rarely observed as diffuse hypoechoic enlargement.
• Leukemia can be observed either as multiple hypoechoic masses or as
diffuse hypoechoic enlargement.
• Metastatic disease is characterized by gross, diffuse, disorganized
distortion.
• Angiomyolipomas are benign tumors that are well circumscribed and
very echogenic.
• 80% are idiopathic.
• More common (#4) in women than in men.
• In association with tuberose sclerosis, are bilateral and multiple.
Renal Stones
• All types of stones produce acoustic shadow if !2 mm in size.

369
Patient with RENAL LESION

A Flank pain

Palpable mass
Hematuria
US
CT
MRI

Cyst

Solitary cyst

Cyst not solitary
Cont’d on p 371

B Fulfills criteria for
benign cyst

Does not fulfill criteria
for benign cyst

Simple renal cyst

CT
MRI
Surgical exploration

Periodic reevaluation

Consider:
Renal carcinoma
Cystademocarcinoma

Nephrocalcinosis

Solid mass

Cont’d on p 371

Cont’d on p 371

370
Malignancy and metastases can develop in a small
percentage of cases. Screening of all dialysis patients by
renal US is recommended after 3 years of dialysis at
1- to 2-year intervals. Major clinical manifestations of
acquired cystic disease include flank pain and hematuria in association with rupture of hemorrhagic cysts into
the urinary tract or into the perinephric region. Cysts
often resolve after successful renal transplantation.
D. Autosomal-dominant polycystic kidney disease
(ADPKD) is the most common renal hereditary disease and affects 1 in 400–1000 live births. ADPKD
is usually recognized in adults between the third and
fourth decades of life. Adult polycystic kidney disease
(PKD) causes renal insufficiency in 50% individuals
by age 70 years and accounts for 10% of dialysis patients in the United States. ADPKD is caused by
defective PKD1 gene on chromosome 16p in 85% of
cases. A positive diagnosis requires (1) at least two
cysts (unilateral or bilateral) in patients "30 years of
age, (2) at least two cysts in each kidney in patients
aged 30–59 years, or (3) four or more cysts in each
kidney in patients !60 years. These age-specific data
have been developed in reference to PKD1 patients.
Pathology of ADPKD is characterized by massive enlargement of the kidneys secondary to cyst growth and
development. The liver also contains cysts in about
40% of patients with ADPKD. Arterial aneurysms of
the circle of Willis are found in about 10% of patients.
Diagnosis by US is straightforward in advanced disease
but may be less reliable in the early stages. CT scan
and MRI are more informative, and genetic testing
may be required when greater certainty is needed for
ADPKD diagnosis.
E. Medullary cystic kidney disease is a rare autosomaldominant cystic disease characterized by normal- to
small-sized kidneys. When cysts are found, they are
located at the corticomedullary junction and in the
medulla. Diagnosis relies on clinical features with a
thorough family history. CT scan is the most sensitive
test for cyst detection. The first signs are inability to
concentrate the urine and salt wasting, leading to
polyuria and polydipsia. Medullary cystic disease progresses inevitably to end-stage renal disease (ESRD)
by the age of 20–40 years. Transplantation is the
treatment of choice.
F. Medullary sponge kidney usually is not diagnosed before the fourth or fifth decade of life, when patients
have secondary calcifications with passage of urinary
stones or frequent urinary tract infections. This is a

benign disorder with incidence of 1 in 5000 in the general population. The diagnosis is made by IV urography,
which shows irregular enlargement of the medullary
and interpapillary collecting ducts bilaterally. There is
no specific therapy for medullary sponge kidney disease. The patients should be advised to excrete !2 L of
urine per day and may benefit from a thiazide diuretic
for hypercalciuria, allopurinol for hyperuricosuria, or
potassium citrate for hypocitraturia.
G. Renal cell cancer occurs at a rate of 7.5 cases per
100,000 population annually. It accounts for !80% of
renal malignancies in adults and occurs more often in
men than in women. Risk factors for renal cell carcinoma are smoking, chemicals such as cadmium and
nitroso hydrocarbons, acquired cystic disease in ESRD,
and Hippel-Lindau disease. Patients may present with
hematuria, abdominal mass, flank pain, fever, weight
loss, or vericocoele, but many patients are asymptomatic until the disease is advanced. Laboratory findings
include anemia or erythrocytosis, hepatic dysfunction,
and hypercalcemia. CT scan with radiographic contrast
is currently the most widely available, sensitive, and
accurate nonoperative method available for making a
presumptive diagnosis of renal cancer and its staging.
Nuclear MRI is used over CT scanning (1) when detecting tumors in regional lymph nodes and extension
into the renal veins and inferior vena cava, (2) in patients with radiographic contrast allergy, and (3) when
CT results are equivocal. For patients without distant
metastases the treatment of choice is radical nephrectomy. The average survival of patients with metastases
is only 6–9 months. Postoperative adjuvant radiation,
hormonal therapy, and chemotherapy are not proven
to prolong survival.
References
Bosniak MA. The small (less than or equal to 3.0 cm) renal parenchymal tumor: detection, diagnosis, and controversies. Radiology 1991;
179(2):307–317.
Curry NS, Bissada NK. Radiologic evaluation of small and indeterminate
renal masses. Urol Clin North Am 1997;24:493–505.
Grantham JJ. Cystic diseases of the kidney. In Stein’s Internal Medicine,
5th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby, 1998.
McKinney TD. Renal cell carcinoma. In Stein’s Internal Medicine,
5th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby, 1998.
Rizk D, Chapman AB. Cystic and inherited kidney diseases. Am J Kidney
Dis 2003;42(6):1305–1317.
Rose BD, Bennett WM, Kruskal JB. Simple renal cysts and evaluation of
renal masses in adults. UpToDate 2005. www.uptodate.com.
Watnick S, Morrison G. Approach to renal disease. In Current Medical
Diagnosis & Treatment, 44th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005.

371
Patient with RENAL LESION
(Cont’d from p 369)

Cyst not solitary

Bilateral cyst

Cyst not bilateral
Consider:
Localized
cystic disease

Patient receiving
dialysis

Patient not
receiving dialysis

C Acquired renal
cystic disease

Enlarged
kidneys

D Adult PKD

Kidneys not
enlarged

E Consider:

Medullary
cystic disease

Nephrocalcinosis
Retrograde pyelography

Dilated terminal
collecting ducts

F Medullary

sponge kidney

Terminal
collecting ducts
not dilated
Consider:
Noncystic
urinary tract
disease

Solid mass

Fat density
Angiomyolipoma

No fat density

G Consider:

Renal cell
carcinoma

Consider:
Surgical
exploration

