RESPIRATORY SYMPTOMS AND OCCUPATIONAL EXPOSURE TO ASBESTOS

A. The first step in any assessment is to take a comprehensive history with a focus on the exposure to asbestos. In the United States, the majority of exposure was
to chrysolite, a serpentine fiber, which is thought to be
less likely to cause disease. In contrast, the long rodlike
fibers of amphibole asbestos (e.g., crocidolite, amosite,
and tremolite) were much less commonly used. Specific occupations with the potential for high exposure
to asbestos include plumbers, pipe fitters, insulation
workers, electricians, boilermakers, and obviously
those who worked mining asbestos. Shipyards, particularly in the 1940s, were a common place for occupational exposure. More recently, mechanics who specifically work on brakes are at risk for exposure to the
asbestos found in brake linings. For the most part,
symptomatic lung disease related to asbestos exposure
manifests itself 15–20 years after the exposure. If
symptoms occur much closer temporally to an exposure, the differential for the cause of dyspnea should
be broadened.
B. A complete physical examination with particular emphasis on the lung examination should accompany history taking. The finding of crackles, decreased breath
sounds, or dullness to percussion may suggest specific
pathologies. In almost all cases, the next step should be
a chest x-ray (CXR). Further evaluation is guided by
what is found on imaging.
C. The most common finding in patients with asbestos
exposure is pleural plaques—areas of pleural thickening and calcification. Plaques themselves are generally
benign, although they may be seen in conjunction with
other forms of asbestos-related lung disease. The clinician should obtain lung volumes to evaluate for restrictive physiology (total lung capacity !70% predicted) as
a result of pleural disease if the patient presents with
dyspnea. As plaques are associated with future asbestosis, these patients should be followed and monitored
for future fibrosis.
D. Distinct from the parietal pleural plaques and much
less common is diffuse visceral pleural thickening associated with asbestos exposure. This pathology is
much more likely to result in restrictive physiology,
which should be evaluated for with pulmonary function testing.
E. Although the majority of findings associated with asbestos are found many years after exposure, pleural
effusions can be found after an acute exposure and
504

more remotely. These effusions are exudative, often
with a prominent eosinophilia. Although generally
painless and often found incidentally, an acute asbestos
pleural effusion may be painful and associated with
fever and dyspnea. All of these effusions should be
tapped. Chronic effusions warrant cytologic examination for malignancy and if there are any concerning
features (e.g., loculation, associated irregular pleural
thickening), a thoracoscopic pleural biopsy should be
considered.
F. Malignant mesothelioma is strongly associated with
asbestos; approximately 70% of patients with this disease have a known exposure. It is often difficult to
diagnose and commonly requires pleural biopsy.
Although in the past this may be have been done with
needle biopsy, as the yield of this procedure is quite
low, patients generally should proceed to thoracoscopic biopsy if pleural fluid cytology is unrevealing.
Unfortunately, both surgical and chemotherapeutic
options for mesothelioma are of limited benefit. Physicians should consider referral to a center that specializes in treatment of these rare cancers.
G. If the CXR reveals reticulonodular changes, the physician should have concern for asbestosis, which is often
difficult to distinguish from idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). Features that help distinguish these two
diseases are a history of exposure to asbestos and associated pleural plaques. Although both diseases are
generally lower lobe predominant, there is a subtype of
asbestosis that is severe, upper lobe disease. Next steps
in assessment include lung volumes and measurement
of carbon dioxide diffusion in the lungs (DLCO) to assess for restrictive physiology and abnormal gas exchange in addition to a CT scan of the chest to better
characterize the infiltrates. A clinical diagnosis is usually made without the need for a lung biopsy, although
at times this is undertaken to rule out alternative diagnoses. The finding of asbestos fibers or asbestos bodies
adds to the diagnostic certainty but is not required and
in itself is not pathognomonic of asbestosis. There is no
specific therapy for asbestosis and care is generally
supportive.
H. Cigarette smoking and asbestos have a synergistic effect in increasing the risk for primary lung cancer. If a
mass is found on CXR, a CT scan should be obtained
and further evaluation, as with any lung mass, should
be pursued.

505
Patient with RESPIRATORY SYMPTOMS AND OCCUPATIONAL EXPOSURE TO ASBESTOS

A Complete history and

physical examination
Emphasis on occupational
exposures

B CXR
C Pleural plaques
Obtain lung
volumes
Follow clinically

D Diffuse pleural
thickening

E Pleural effusion

G Fibrosis
Pulmonary
function tests:
Lung volumes
DLCO
CT scan

Thoracentesis
Obtain lung volumes Cell count
Follow clinically
Lactate dehydrogenase/
protein
Cytology

Positive cytology

Negative
cytology

H Lung mass
Bronchoalveolar lavage,
transbronchial biopsy
Needle biopsy or
surgical biopsy

Clinical diagnosis
of asbestosis

Competing alternative
diagnoses

Supportive care

Consider surgical biopsy

Treat malignancy

Benign features
Follow clinically

F Concerning features
Thoracoscopic pleural biopsy

Malignant mesothelioma

Benign pathology

Surgery or chemotherapy

Follow clinically

References
American Thoracic Society. Diagnosis and initial management of
nonmalignant diseases related to asbestos. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2004;170(6):691–715.
BTS statement on malignant mesothelioma in the UK, 2007. Thorax
2007;62(Suppl 2):ii1–ii19.
Chapman SJ, Philadelphia Cookson WO, Musk AW, et al. Benign asbestos pleural diseases. Curr Opin Pulm Med 2003;9(4):266–271.
Cugell DW, Kamp DW. Asbestos and the pleura: a review. Chest
2004;125(3):1103–1117.
Fraser RS, Paré PD. Fraser and Paré’s Diagnosis of Diseases of the
Chest, ed 4, Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 1999.
Gevenois PA, de Maertelaer V, Madani A, et al. Asbestosis, pleural
plaques and diffuse pleural thickening: three distinct benign responses
to asbestos exposure. Eur Respir J 1998;11(5):1021–1027.

Ghio AJ, Roggli VL. Diagnosis and initial management of nonmalignant
diseases related to asbestos. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2005;171(5):
527; author reply 528–530.
Ohar J, Sterling DA, Bleecker E, et al. Changing patterns in asbestosinduced lung disease. Chest 2004;125(2):744–753.
O’Reilly KM, Mclaughlin AM, Beckett S, et al. Asbestos-related lung
disease. Am Fam Physician 2007;75(5):683–688.
Ross RM. The clinical diagnosis of asbestosis in this century requires
more than a chest radiograph. Chest 2003;124(3):1120–1128.
Weill D, Weill H. Diagnosis and initial management of nonmalignant
diseases related to asbestos. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2005;171(5):527–528; author reply 528–530.

