A. Risk assessment: Respiratory complaints are among the most common reasons HIV-positive persons seek medical care and can be the sentinel event that leads to a new diagnosis of HIV. Evaluation of pulmonary symptoms in HIV-positive persons should begin with an assessment of the patient's level of immunosuppression. Although it is widely recognized that the risk of opportunistic pulmonary infections such as Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia (PCP) is greatest in persons with a CD4 count ≤200 cells/mm³, the risk is also increased in patients with a CD4/CD8 ratio of ≤14% and in those with a previous history of other opportunistic infections. Clues to advanced immunosuppression in persons whose CD4 count is not immediately available include a history of weight loss, thrush, or marked lymphopenia. Use o at helps to focus the evaluation of HIV-infected persons with respiratory complaints. PCP is rare in persons taking trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX) prophylaxis. Likewise, rates of typical community-acquired bacterial pneumonias as well as unusual causes of pneumonia such as Nocardia are less common in those taking TMP/SMX prophylaxis. Use of second-line PCP prophylaxis such as dapsone, atovaquone, and aerosolized pentamidine provide incomplete protection against PCP compared to TMP/SMX and may alter the presentation of opportunistic infections (e.g., upper lobe PCP with aerosolized pentamidine). Unlike TMP/SMX, second-line prophylaxis does not provide protection against other common respiratory pathogens such as Streptococcus pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae. Given the increased rates of infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis in HIV-infected persons and the important public health challenges co-infection presents, it is important to consider the possibility of active tuberculosis (TB) in persons with HIV who present with respiratory complaints. The pulmonary manifestations of TB are often atypical in persons with HIV, especially those with advanced AIDS. Persons at high risk for TB include those with suggestive radiographic findings (especially cavitary disease), persons with a history of positive purified protein derivative (PPD) tests who did not receive treatment for latent TB infection, individuals from parts of the world where TB is highly endemic, and those at high risk for exposure to TB (history of contact with person with active TB, homelessness, or incarceration). HIV-infected persons suspected of having TB should be placed in respiratory isolation until the diagnosis can be confirmed and effectively treated or an alternative diagnosis ascertained.
B. Chest radiography: Although generally not diagnostic, the radiographic pattern of infiltrates can suggest likely etiologies of infection. Diffuse interstitial infiltrates are common in persons with PCP, as are viral pneumonias (community-acquired such as influenza or more rarely opportunistic infections such as cytomegalovirus), fungal infections (especially endemic fungi), Toxoplasma gondii, and TB (especially in persons with advanced AIDS). Lobar consolidation is more common in community-acquired bacterial pneumonia (S. pneumoniae and H. influenzae), TB (with higher CD4 counts), and Legionella pneumophilia. Cavitary lesions should prompt consideration of TB; however, bacterial pathogens such as Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Rhodococcus equi, Nocardia, and Mycobacterium avium complex can also produce cavitary lesions. PCP and fungi (especially Cryptococcus neoformans, Aspergillus, and Histoplasma capsulatum) may also cavitate. Pleural effusions are uncommon in PCP and should prompt consideration of TB or a noninfectious process such as heart failure or lymphoma. A normal chest x-ray (CXR) does not exclude opportunistic pulmonary infections, because both PCP and TB can be seen in up to 10% of persons with a normal CXR. Although pulmonary infiltrates in persons with HIV are often due to opportunistic infections, such infections are not the only causes of radiographic abnormalities in HIV-infected patients. Noninfectious causes of CXR abnormalities associated with HIV infection include drug reactions (diffuse infiltrates associated with abacavir hypersensitivity), lymphocytic interstitial pneumonitis (diffuse infiltrates seen most commonly in children and older women), Kaposi's sarcoma (peribronchial and nodular lesions), primary pulmonary hypertension (large pulmonary arteries), and malignancies such as non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) and lung carcinoma (hilar adenopathy or nodular lung lesions).
C. Clinical clues: Clinical clues including the duration of symptoms, injection drug use, travel, treatment history, immune status, and physical examination can hint at the etiology of pulmonary infiltrates. Abrupt onset of fever and cough suggests community-acquired pneumonia while subacute evolution of fever and dyspnea (weeks not days) is typical of PCP. Injection drug users are more prone to bacterial pneumonia, TB, and endocarditis. Prior residence or travel to endemic regions should raise suspicion for fungal infections such as histoplasmosis, coccidiomycosis, and blastomycosis as well as parasitic infections such as strongyloidiasis. Antiretroviral therapy history can provide clues both to medication-related toxicity (abacavir hypersensitivity) as well as the development of an immune reconstitution syndrome (new or worsening infiltrates on CXR in patients recently started on antiretrovirals, particularly in conjunction with treatment for active TB). Notably, even patients with preserved CD4 counts suffer greater rates of bacterial pneumonia than uninfected counterparts. Physical examination findings such as weight loss and thrush are signs of advanced immunosuppression and should guide the differential diagnosis accordingly. Funduscopic examination may demonstrate changes associated with a variety of viral, fungal, and mycobacterial pathogens. Regional lymphadenopathy may suggest TB or NHL. Skin lesions are common in cryptococcosis and histoplasmosis, and mucocutaneous lesions are an established risk factor for pulmonary Kaposi's sarcoma.
D. Microbiologic testing: Microbiologic testing of respiratory secretions is critical. HIV-infected patients with respiratory complaints and a productive cough should submit sputum for Gram stain and culture, fungal stain and culture, and acid-fast bacillus (AFB) smear and culture. In the proper setting, antigen or molecular testing for respiratory viruses may also be useful in establishing the cause of an HIV-infected person's respiratory complaints. Most patients with PCP have a nonproductive cough and have difficulty producing a deep sputum specimen. HIV-positive patients should have samples collected after induction with hypertonic saline when being evaluated for PCP. Several samples may need to be obtained as the diagnostic yield of a single induced specimen for PCP varies from 50%-90% depending on the prevalence of PCP in the population studied, techniques used to identify the organisms (methenamine silver stain, immunofluorescence, polymerase chain reaction [PCR]), and the expertise of the laboratory performing the test. The evaluation of HIV-infected persons with suspected TB requires three sequential daily samples for AFB smear and culture (samples need not be induced unless the patient is unable to produce a sample). The sensitivity of a single AFB smear may be as low as 30%, but cultures are subsequently positive in 85%-100% of patients.
E. Assessment of gas exchange: The evaluation of respiratory complaints in persons with HIV should include an assessment of oxygenation (pulse oximetry or blood gas measurement). PCP commonly produces hypoxemia with exertion, so patients with normal room-air oxygenation saturation should have pulse oximetry assessed during ambulation. Assessment of gas exchange has important therapeutic implications for patients with PCP as well. Because treatment of PCP often results in transient worsening of oxygenation as organisms die, it is important to assess the degree to which gas exchange is impaired. Adjuvant steroids should be considered for those with an alveolar-arterial gradient of ≥35 and/or a PO2 of ≤70 mm Hg on room air.
F. Empiric therapy for PCP: HIV-positive persons with a CD4 count of ≤200 cells/mm³ who present with fever, progressive dyspnea, and diffuse interstitial infiltrates on CXR are likely suffering from PCP. When such individuals are at low risk for TB, have not been taking PCP prophylaxis, and are not suffering from severe impairment of gas exchange, it is common to begin treatment for PCP while waiting for the results of induced sputum testing. Because of the high pretest probability of PCP, HIV-infected persons with a depressed CD4 count and a normal CXR should be treated empirically if they demonstrate impaired gas exchange. Although nonspecific, elevation of serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) can provide additional evidence of PCP in such cases. High-resolution CT of the chest may also be helpful in demonstrating subtle interstitial changes missed with a plain radiograph. In patients at lower risk for PCP or with more severe illness, empiric therapy for PCP may also be considered but further testing should be aggressively pursued so that alternative etiologies for a patient's respiratory complaints can be evaluated.
G. Additional diagnostic testing: Steps for further evaluation are dependent upon the patient's degree of immunosuppression and the tempo of the illness. Patients with a CD4 count of ≤50 cells/mm³ who present with progressive hypoxemia despite appropriate empiric treatment for PCP would likely benefit from early bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage. By contrast, individuals with preserved CD4 counts and chronic respiratory complaints may benefit first from pulmonary function testing or echocardiography to evaluate noninfectious causes of respiratory difficulties. In patients who remain undiagnosed, bronchoscopy with transbronchial biopsy, video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery, and/or open lung biopsy are often needed to make a definitive diagnosis.

