RHINITIS

Anastasia Rowland-Seymour, MD
Rhinitis is described as inflammation of the nasal mucosa
and is characterized by the constellation of symptoms, including nasal congestion, rhinorrhea, sneezing, and itching
of the eyes and/or nose. The sinuses, ears, and throat may
also be involved. Allergic rhinitis is by far the most common
type of rhinitis. Types of rhinitis include allergic rhinitis,
infectious rhinitis (viral and bacterial), and nonallergic rhinitis. Nonallergic rhinitis includes nonallergic rhinitis with
eosinophilia syndrome (NARES), vasomotor rhinitis, gustatory rhinitis (vagally mediated), hormonal rhinitis (e.g.,
related to pregnancy and hypothyroidism), rhinitis medicamentosa (e.g., topical decongestants; antihypertensives
and oral contraceptives), anatomic rhinitis (e.g., deviated
septum, choanal atresia, adenoid hypertrophy, foreign body,
nasal tumor), immotile cilia syndrome (ciliary dyskinesis),
granulomatous rhinitis (e.g., Wegener’s granulomatosis, sarcoidosis), and atrophic rhinitis (colonization with Klebsiella
ozaenae).
One must also consider cerebrospinal fluid leak or nasal
polyps. Nasal polyps often occur in common with allergic
rhinitis, but not necessarily a causal relationship, and may
not respond to medications.
A careful history and physical examination usually can
determine the cause of the rhinitis. Historical clues to diagnosis include environmental exposures, occupational exposure, personal and family history of allergies, additional past
medical history (hypothyroidism, pregnancy, sarcoidosis),
recent sick contacts, and medication usage (!5 days of taking nasal sympathomimetics). Physical clues may include
“allergic shiners” (dark circles under eyes); pale, bluish
boggy turbinates; and cobblestoning in posterior pharynx
(allergic rhinitis) versus erythematous turbinates (rhinitis
medicamentosa, infectious, or vasomotor rhinitis).
A. Allergic rhinitis is by far the most common type of rhinitis. Estimates suggest 9%–40% of the U.S. population
have some degree of allergic rhinitis. In 80% of cases,
allergic rhinitis develops by age 20 years. Incidence
wanes as we age, and it is much less common in the
geriatric population. History of eczema and family history of atopy may help in the diagnosis. Symptoms
occur in individuals who produce an immunoglobulin E
(IgE)–mediated response to particular allergens. Allergens may be one or many, seasonal or perennial. Common

32

seasonal allergens are trees, grasses, and weeds. Common perennial allergens include dust mites, cockroaches, animal proteins, dander, and molds. Diagnosing occupational rhinitis can be challenging because
symptoms may occur several hours after exposure.
Additionally, with chronic exposure, symptoms may not
improve on weekends, requiring longer periods of
avoidance. With occupational rhinitis, patients typically
present with concomitant occupational asthma. Physical examination may reveal allergic shiners; injected
conjunctivae; clear nasal discharge; pale, bluish boggy
turbinates; and cobblestoning in the posterior pharynx.
Allergen avoidance is of utmost importance. Maintaining indoor humidity to "50% to limit house dust mite
and mold growth may be helpful. First-line treatment
of allergic rhinitis is topical intranasal steroids. Additional treatment choices include oral or intranasal antihistamines as a good second choice. Intranasal cromolyn started several weeks prior to allergy season may be
effective, leukotriene inhibitors alone or in conjunction
with antihistamines are useful, and oral decongestants
can be effective. Topical decongestants must be used
sparingly because of the development of tachyphylaxis
after 3–7 days of use. With prolonged use a resulting
rebound nasal congestion and rhinitis medicamentosa
develop. Hypertonic saline rinsing of the nares can be
used for additional benefit in both acute and chronic
rhinosinusitis. If medical maneuvers fail, skin testing
and immunotherapy remain an option. Perennial allergic rhinitis appears to be a predisposing factor
for acute bacterial rhinosinusitis by causing ostial
obstruction.
B. NARES accounts for 15%–20% of patients with rhinitis. It is characterized by perennial symptoms of nasal
congestion, nasal itching, rhinorrhea, hyposmia, and
sneezing. These symptoms are milder than in patients
with perennial allergic rhinitis, but they are still bothersome. Nasal secretions contain 25% eosinophils on
smear. IgE antibodies to inhalant allergens are usually
absent. Some researchers believe this is a precursor to
the triad of asthma, nasal polyposis, and aspirin allergy.
The most useful medications have proved to be topical
nasal steroids, and if polyps are present, leukotriene
inhibitors have also been shown to be helpful.

33
Patient with RHINITIS

Chronic, intermittent,
or seasonal

A Allergic symptoms

Acute (7–10 days)

No allergic symptoms

Assess for environmental
triggers, including occupational

Cont’d on p 35

Remove triggers
if possible

No triggers
found

Persistent
symptoms

Nasal smear
for eosinophils

Antihistamines
Nasal steroids
Cromolyn

#25% eosinophils

B NARES

Cont’d on p 35

Few eosinophils

C Vasomotor rhinitis

Inhaled steroids
Ipratropium

C. Vasomotor rhinitis (idiopathic rhinitis) is an umbrella
term for many types of nonallergic rhinitis, including
gustatory and hormonal rhinitis. Patients with vasomotor rhinitis complain of chronic nasal congestion
with or without persistent rhinorrhea, exacerbated
by cold air, strong odors, stress, or inhaled irritants.
For the most part, vasomotor rhinitis is believed to

Inhaled steroid
ipratropium

result from autonomic dysfunction in the nose where
the parasympathetic system dominates, resulting in
vasodilation and edema of the nasal vasculature. Idiopathic rhinitis is a diagnosis of exclusion. Allergy
skin testing is negative. Nasal steroids are useful, and
if rhinorrhea is a major factor, ipratropium can be
effective.
(Continued on p 34)

34
D. Imaging (CT scan of sinuses) should be limited to those
patients who have persistent symptoms or if symptoms
recur. Recurrent rhinosinusitis may also indicate an underlying process such as nasal polyps, other anatomic
abnormalities, ciliary dysfunction, cystic fibrosis, immune deficiency, sarcoidosis, Wegener’s granulomatosis,
or relapsing polychondritis. Last, atrophic rhinitis is a
syndrome of progressive atrophy of the nasal mucosa in
the elderly debilitated population. Patients report a persistent foul odor that is a result of nasal mucosal colonization with Klebsiella ozaenae. These patients respond best
to nasal irrigation.
E. Prolonged use of intranasal decongestants can result in
rebound congestion (rhinitis medicamentosa). The restoration of normal nasal function may take up to 21 days
after withdrawal of the sympathomimetics. Additionally,
numerous medications can cause rhinitis, including antihypertensives such as angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitors, reserpine, phentolamine, methyldopa, and
beta blockers; chlorpromazine; gabapentin; penicillamine; aspirin; NSAIDs; exogenous estrogens; and oral
contraceptives. The use of intranasal cocaine can cause
these symptoms as well.
F. Infectious rhinitis can be caused by both viruses and
bacteria (bacterial rhinitis), with the common cold
being the most common cause of infectious rhinitis.
Acute infectious rhinitis is often considered in conjunction with acute sinusitis. Symptoms statistically
associated with culture-proven acute bacterial sinusitis include nasal congestion, purulent rhinorrhea,
postnasal drip, facial or dental pain, and cough. The
guidelines recommend that a diagnosis of acute bacterial rhinosinusitis (ABRS) is appropriate in patients
who have had symptoms of a viral upper respiratory
infection who have not improved after 10 days or
worsen after 5–7 days. Streptococcus pneumoniae
and Haemophilus influenzae account for 50% of rhinosinusitis bacterial isolates. Moraxella catarrhalis,
other streptococcal species, Staphylococcus aureus,

and anaerobic bacteria each account for a small proportion of cases. Of symptomatic patients, 30% have
negative bacterial cultures, suggesting either viral or
allergic disease. Because it is not possible to predict
which cases of ABRS will resolve spontaneously, the
use of an antimicrobial is recommended.
Prior antibiotic use is a major risk factor for infection
with antimicrobial-resistant strains. For patients with
mild disease who have not received antibiotics in the
prior 4–6 weeks, initial therapy should include amoxicillin-clavulanate, amoxicillin, cefpodoxime, cefuroxime,
or cefdinir. Fluoroquinolones or high-dose amoxicillinclavulanate is recommended as first-line therapy for
patients with mild disease who have had recent antibiotics or for patients with moderate disease. Treatment
with a macrolide after treatment failure with amoxicillin
or a cephalosporin will result in a second treatment
failure in about 60% of cases as a result of high
rates of resistance to macrolides in penicillin-resistant
S. pneumoniae and H. influenzae.
References
Becker B, Borum S, Nielsen K, et al. A time-dose study of the effect of
topical ipratropium bromide on methacholine-induced rhinorrhoea in
patients with perennial non-allergic rhinitis. Clin Otolaryngol
1997;22(2):132–134.
deShazo RD, Kemp SF. Rhinosinusitis. South Med J 2003;96(11):
1055–1060.
Dykewicz MS, Fineman S. Executive Summary of Joint Task Force Practice Parameters on Diagnosis and Management of Rhinitis. Ann
Allergy Asthma Immunol 1998;81(5 Pt 2):463–468.
Dykewicz MS, Fineman S, Skoner DP, et al. Diagnosis and management
of rhinitis: complete guidelines of the Joint Task Force on Practice
Parameters in Allergy, Asthma and Immunology. American Academy
of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol
1998;81(5 Pt 2):478–518.
Meltzer EO, Hamilos DL, Hadley JA, et al. Rhinosinusitis: establishing
definitions for clinical research and patient care. Otolarygol Head
Neck Surg 2004;131(6):S1–62.
Poole MD, Portugal LG. Treatment of rhinosinusitis in the outpatient
setting. Am J Med 2005;118(7A):455–505.
Tomooka LT, Murphy C, Davidson TM. Clinical study and literature
review of nasal irrigation. Laryngoscope 2000;110(7):1189–1193.

35
Patient with RHINITIS
(Cont’d from p 33)

Chronic, intermittent,
or seasonal

Acute (7–10 days)

No allergic symptoms
Clear discharge
Erythematous turbinates

Review medication list

Offending
medications
No offending
medications

E

Rhinitis
medicamentosa

Other upper
Offending medications
Other
respiratory infection
symptoms
E Rhinitis
Symptoms
medicamentosa
persist !10 days
Viral rhinitis
Supportive
therapy

Remove
medication

See Chronic
Rhinitis

Remove
medications
Hypersensibility to
nonspecific triggers
such as cold air,
strong odors, irritants

No triggers

D
Go to

C

Systemic disease
and other

Purulent discharge

F

ABRS (can occur with
chronic allergic sinusitis)
Antibiotics

