RIGHT VENTRICULAR FAILURE

Right ventricular (RV) failure is the final common path
for several different clinical entities. RV function can
be a useful clinical window into the state of the pulmonary vasculature and systemic circulation, including
the left ventricle. Although in many cases the cause of
RV failure is clear, the challenge is to discern if the underlying dysfunction is secondary to (1) “left-sided” or systemic
cardiac dysfunction, (2) pathology in the lungs (either
pulmonary vascular, parenchymal, or airway disease), (3) an
issue isolated to the “right-sided” or pulmonic circulation, or
(4) some combination of the general categories cited. Although classic conventions of left- and right-sided dysfunction are used, it is worth noting that such designations may be
particularly confusing when addressing complex congenital
heart abnormalities; therefore, systemic and pulmonic may
prove to be more accurate descriptors. Because RV failure is a
common final pathway, we advocate a systematic diagnostic
and therapeutic approach.
A. A thorough history and physical examination are particularly useful in discerning the cause of RV failure.
The history should attempt to systematically exonerate or indict the broad categories depicted earlier,
namely, systemic cardiac dysfunction, pulmonary pathology, isolated pulmonic cardiac dysfunction, or a
combination of these factors. Interrogation about the
systemic circulation includes any history of acquired
ventricular or valvular dysfunction and contributing
factors (coronary risk factors, history of myocardial
infarction [MI], myocarditis, alcohol ingestion, and
rheumatic fever). Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea and
orthopnea may also be clues that RV failure may be
present in the setting of left atrial (LA) hypertension.
Any history or symptoms suggestive of pulmonary hypertension, interstitial lung disease (ILD), chronic
airway issues, sleep apnea, kyphoscoliosis, pleural disease, or diaphragmatic dysfunction may be helpful
and may point to the lungs as the primary pathologic
focus. A family history of syncope, sudden death, or
congenital heart abnormalities may also be useful.
Symptoms of RV failure may include fatigue (from low
cardiac output), nausea with or without vague right
upper quadrant discomfort (from liver congestion),
weight gain, increase in abdominal girth, lower extremity edema, and exertional symptoms (chest pain,
dyspnea, decreased exercise tolerance). It is also very
important to determine the chroniity of the patient’s

88

complaints (acute vs. chronic) to understand the
rate at which the process is progressing.
The physical examination should focus on including/
excluding diagnostic possibilities in addition to attempting to qualitatively discern the pressure/volume state of
both the pulmonic and systemic ventricles. Vital signs
(temperature, blood pressure, heart rate, peripheral O2
saturation, and weight) not only may speak to level of
decompensation but also may point to specific etiologies. Inspection of the chest wall and spine may be
helpful, allowing visualization of the pattern of breathing and qualitative assessment of the tidal volume.
Healed median sternotomy and thoracotomy scars can
also provide useful clues (congenital heart disease
[CHD], lung disease). Evaluation of the jugular venous
pressure is essential because it can provide a window
into the right ventricle’s filling pressures and also into
tricuspid valve function (prominent A waves—tricuspid
stenosis; prominent V waves—tricuspid regurgitation).
Kussmaul’s sign should also be sought (constrictive
pericarditis). In patients with RV failure on the basis of
elevated pulmonary arterial pressures, pulmonic valve
closure may be palpated left of the second intercostal
space at end systole. Pulmonary arterial pulsations may
be felt on either side of the sternum at the level of the
second intercostal space. Placement of the examiner’s
hand on the patient’s sternum may elicit the presence
of an RV heave, and prominent RV pulsation may be
felt just below the xiphoid. Percussion of the border on
the right side of the heart may demonstrate an enlarged
right atrium. Auscultation should focus on evaluation of
valvular pathology, CHD, and the presence of rightand/or left-sided gallops (S4 or S3). Splitting of the second heart sound should also be noted (wide split is
suggestive of a right bundle branch block; fixed split is
suggestive of an atrial septal defect). Graham Steell’s
murmur (pulmonic regurgitation from pulmonary hypertension) may be present. Right-sided gallops are
often heard at the lower-left sternal border or in the
subxiphoid area with the bell of the stethoscope lightly
held. The presence of gallops may speak to the presence of both pressure and volume overload in either
ventricle. Hepatomegaly, ascites, and lower-extremity
edema may also be present. Palpation of the proximal
limbs may also be helpful indicators of systemic vascular resistance, with “cool” extremities suggestive of poor
cardiac output with elevated systemic resistance.

89
Patient with RIGHT VENTRICULAR FAILURE

A History and

physical examination

B Chest x-ray
C ECG

D Acute

RV
MI

Tamponade

Pseudo: absent
pericardium

Chronic

Embolism:
thrombotic,
amniotic, fat

Tricuspid valve
disruption

Procedure/trauma

B. The chest x-ray can be a helpful diagnostic tool and can
help confirm physical examination findings. It can be
particularly useful as a preliminary screen for pulmonary parenchymal and pleural-based disease. It can
also provide a gross estimate of heart size and particular chamber enlargement. Ideally, a lateral chest
film should be included in addition to the traditional
posteroanterior (PA) view. The lateral film can help
with the diagnosis of rare issues, such as congenital
absence of the pericardium (cardiomegaly present in
the PA view, but not in the lateral) and Ebstein’s
anomaly. The extent and balance owf the pulmonary
vascularity can also serve as important clues pointing
not only to etiology but also to severity.

Focal
myocarditis

Cont’d on p 91

Endocarditis

C. ECG is an essential part of the initial workup of rightsided heart failure. It is always valuable to look for
evidence of chamber enlargement or hypertrophy,
particularly of the right ventricle. The ECG may be
particularly useful in the setting of acute RV decompensation, where RV infarction (ST elevation in V1
with inferior ST changes; ST elevation in V3 or V4R)
and acute pulmonary embolism (sinus tachycardia,
right bundle branch block, S1Q3T3, T-wave inversions across the precordium) may be prominent players. RV dysplasia may also be preliminarily diagnosed
(epsilon wave).
(Continued on page 92)

90
D. Acute decompensation of RV function is almost always
of great urgency and often requires equally rapid diagnosis and treatment. The right ventricle is designed
to do primarily volume work; any acute increase in
RV afterload (as is the case with a large pulmonary
embolism) may lead to severe deterioration in cardiovascular status. A transthoracic echocardiogram may
be particularly useful in discerning the underlying
cause of acute RV failure and guiding therapeutic interventions. It is worth noting that many of the stigmata of chronic RV failure (i.e., peripheral edema,
ascites, RV hypertrophy [RVH] on ECG, etc.) may
not be present. This is also true of acute, massive
pulmonary embolism, where the estimated PA pressures (based on tricuspid valve velocity) may be only
slightly elevated. Systemic hypotension and cardiovascular collapse may be the only clues. A cardiology
consultant and a cardiac surgeon may be extremely
helpful in the diagnosis and management of acute RV
decompensation.
E. Although potentially less dramatic, chronic failure of the
right ventricle may lead to equally poor outcomes when
compared with acute RV failure. Unlike a native right
ventricle exposed to normal afterload, a chronically
pressure-challenged right ventricle can become markedly hypertrophied and generate pressures in excess of
the systemic ventricle (“suprasystemic RV”). As is the
case with acute RV failure, a transthoracic echocardiogram can be a helpful first step in deciphering the etiology of RV dysfunction.
F. One of the most common causes of RV failure is left
ventricular (LV), or systemic ventricular, failure. Before
embarking on an expedition for the rare, it is worthwhile to exclude systemic ventricular or valvular dysfunction and rare causes of elevated LA pressure (cor
triatriatum, supramitral ring, or LA myxoma). This is
particularly true in older patients in whom left-sided
heart disease is more prevalent. Other etiologies that
affect the filling properties of both ventricles, such as
constrictive pericarditis or restrictive cardiomyopathy,
may also be present. Rarer causes of elevated RV afterload that are postcapillary include pulmonary venous
stenosis from external compression (examples include
granulomatous disease, such as sarcoid, or fibrosing

G.

H.

I.

J.

mediastinitis from histoplasmosis) or internal obliteration of the pulmonary venous lumen after procedures
such as pulmonary vein isolation for atrial fibrillation.
Treating systemic ventricular failure aggressively can
lead to simultaneous improvements in RV failure.
If LV failure has been largely excluded, the focus turns to
the right ventricle and its interface with the pulmonary
vasculature. The presence or absence of pulmonary hypertension is an important branch point in this evaluation.
If pulmonary hypertension is present, the diagnostic evaluation is aimed at deciphering an underlying etiology.
If pulmonary hypertension is not present, consider
inherent issues with RV function including arrhythmogenic RV dysplasia (ARVD), Ebstein’s anomaly of the
tricuspid valve, or other forms of congenital heart disease. CHD may be associated with both high and low
pulmonary arterial pressures and RV dysfunction. The
presence of CHD should prompt referral to a center
skilled in the care of adults with CHD.
Most cases of chronic right-sided heart failure, particularly those with associated pulmonary hypertension, ultimately require evaluation via right-sided heart catheterization with the possibility of pulmonary vasodilator
testing.
Over the past several years, the therapeutic armamentarium for the treatment of pulmonary hypertension
has expanded to include continuous IV, SC, and inhaled
prostacyclins in addition to oral endothelin antagonists,
PDE5 inhibitors, and calcium channel blockers. Because the therapeutic algorithm is in flux, referral to
centers specifically aimed at the treatment of pulmonary hypertension is recommended.

References
Cook AL, Hurwitz LM, Valente AM, Herlong JR. Right heart dilatation
in adults: congenital causes. AJR AM J Roentgenol 2007;189(3):
592–560.
Farber HW, Loscalzo J. Pulmonary arterial hypertension. N Engl J Med
2004;351:1655–1665.
Haddad F, Hunt SA, Rosenthal DN, Murphy DJ. Right ventricular function
in cardiovascular disease, part I: anatomy, physiology, aging, and functional assessment of the right ventricle. Circulation. 2008;117(11):
1436–1448.
McLaughlin VV, McGoon MD. Pulmonary arterial hypertension. Circulation 2006;114(13):1417–1431.

91
Patient with RIGHT VENTRICULAR FAILURE
(Cont’d from p 89)

E Chronic
Echocardiogram
Left-sided
pathology?

Yes

F LV dysfunction

Systolic

No

Aortic valve

Mitral valve

Other

Diastolic

Constriction

Restriction

Treat underlying disorder

G Pulmonary hypertension present?

I Yes

H No
Congenital
heart disease

ARVD

Secondary

PPH

Cardiology
ACHD center
Obstructive
ILD
sleep apnea/
hypoventilation

Infectious

Hematologic

Hepatopulmonary

CTEPH
Coagulation
W/U

Schistosomiasis
ID HIV
Sickle cell
anemia

GI

Coumadin, supplemental
oxygen

J Referral to center with experience treating
pulmonary hypertension

