SCLERODERMA

A. Scleroderma is a heterogeneous group of conditions
associated with thickened, sclerotic skin, including
diffuse cutaneous systemic sclerosis (DcSSc) and
limited cutaneous systemic sclerosis (LcSSc, CREST
syndrome [calcinosis, Raynaud’s phenomenon, esophageal dysmotility, sclerodactyly, and telangiectasias]). It
is more common in women than in men and usually
presents between the ages of 30 and 50 years. The
clinical course is highly variable, ranging from a selflimited to a progressive, fatal condition. Raynaud’s
phenomenon is a common presenting symptom. Skin
thickening may be preceded by swelling with pitting
edema and often progresses to ulceration and tethering of skin to underlying structures. Patients may have
internal organ involvement of the GI tract, heart, lungs,
and kidneys.
B. The initial approach to a patient with skin tightening
should focus on determining the extent of cutaneous
involvement and the presence of signs and symptoms
of systemic involvement.
C. Patients with LcSSc, or CREST syndrome, have skin
thickening limited to the hands and feet (sclerodactyly)
but may also involve the face. Calcinosis is often noted
over the hands, fingers, and olecranon bursa. Telangiectasias are seen on the palms, face, and lips. Patients
often have a positive ANA in a centromere pattern.
Patients should be evaluated and treated for esophageal dysmotility and pulmonary hypertension when
present.
D. Patients with DcSSc have skin thickening of the hands
and feet extending proximally and to the face, neck,
and trunk. Skin tightening and tethering may cause
joint contractures and ulcerations. Skin tightening
around the mouth can limit the oral aperture, making
eating and oral hygiene difficult. Raynaud’s phenomenon, affecting !90% of patients, should be managed
with behavior modification (i.e., avoiding exacerbating
factors); however, pharmacologic or even surgical therapy may be necessary. Serologic evaluation is notable
for the anti-Scl-70 antibody in 20% of patients. It is
important to determine the extent of involvement to
guide treatment.
E. Renal crisis, one of the most feared complications of
DcSSc, presents with hypertension and acute renal
failure. The urinary sediment contains mild proteinuria and few to absent cells and casts. High dosages of
corticosteroids may increase the risk of renal crisis.

534

F.

G.

H.

I.

J.

K.

Monitoring blood pressure may allow early detection.
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors are
the primary treatment of renal crisis and may play a
prophylactic role.
Pulmonary disease occurs in approximately 70% of
patients with DcSSc in the form of interstitial lung
disease with alveolitis and pulmonary hypertension.
Patients usually present with dyspnea and a dry cough.
Evaluation initially consists of chest x-ray, pulmonary
function tests, and echocardiogram; and, if abnormal,
high-resolution chest CT scan and bronchoscopy are
useful. Treatment with immunosuppression is often
begun, but prospective controlled trials are under way
to determine whether they truly improve outcomes.
The most frequent internal organ system involved in
scleroderma is the GI tract. Esophageal hypomotility and
esophageal sphincter dysfunction result in gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). Patients should be evaluated
for GERD and treated aggressively. Patients may have
lower GI tract dysmotility, resulting in constipation and
malabsorption. Promotility agents may be helpful.
Cardiac manifestations of scleroderma may include
pericarditis, cardiomyopathy, and arrhythmias. Patients
may require an ECG, Holter monitor, or echocardiogram if cardiac involvement is suspected.
Localized scleroderma (morphea and linear scleroderma) does not have internal organ involvement. It
can occur virtually on any part of the body. Patients may
have multiple plaques ranging in size from 1–30 cm.
Facial involvement resulting in a depressed appearance
is called en coup de sabre (the slash of the sword).
Eosinophilic fasciitis is a scleroderma-like disease characterized by inflammation and thickening of the deep
fascia. The skin may have an “orange-peel” appearance. The CBC is notable for eosinophilia. Raynaud’s
phenomenon and internal organ involvement are absent. Scleredema and scleromyxedema should also be
considered in the evaluation of skin thickening.
Skin thickening may be seen in several disorders, including diabetes, POEMS hypothyroidism (polyneuropathy,
organomegaly, endocrinopathy, M protein, and skin
changes), and chronic graft versus host disease (GVHD).
Nephrogenic fibrosing dermopathy (NFD) is characterized by cutaneous fibrosis of the upper and lower
limbs in patients receiving hemodialysis. Amyloidosis,
bleomycin, and exposures to organic solvents may produce skin thickening as well.

535
Patient with SCLERODERMA

A

C Involvement of

B History and physical examination

D Involvement of skin

distal hands and
feet, face, and neck

proximal to hands
and feet, face, neck,
and trunk

Calcinosis
Raynaud’s phenomenon
Esophageal dysmotility
Sclerodactyly
Telangiectasias

DcSSc

I Localized skin

J

thickening

K Other: eosinophilic fasciitis,

scleredema, scleromyxedema,
diabetic sclerodactyly, hypothyroidism, POEMS, GVHD,
amyloid, NFD, bleomycin,
environmental exposures

Morphea
Linear scleroderma
En coup de sabre

CBC, eosinophil count,
thyroid-stimulating hormone,
blood glucose, serum and
urine protein electrophoresis

LcSSc/CREST

G GI involvement

Evaluation for
systemic involvement

Echocardiogram

Management of
Raynaud’s
phenomenon
and skin care

Barium swallow and
upper endoscopy if
indicated

involvement

Monitor:
Blood pressure
BUN/creatine
Urinalysis

F Pulmonary

involvement

Chest x-ray
Pulmonary function
test with DLCO
echocardiogram

Lower GI tract Consider ACE
inhibitor
evaluation if
indicated

Aggressive
management of
GERD

No pulmonary
hypertension

E Renal

Pulmonary
hypertension

H Cardiac

involvement

ECG, Holter,
echocardiogram

Management of
pericarditis,
cardiomyopathy,
arrhythmias
Normal

Abnormal

Observation
and additional
evaluation

High-resolution
chest CT
and consider
bronchoscopy

Treatment

No dyspnea

Dyspnea

Observation
and additional
evaluation

Additional evaluation
for pulmonary
hypertension
(i.e., right-sided
heart catheterization)

References
Highland KB, Silver RN. Clinical aspects of lung involvement: lessons
from idiopathic fibrosis and the scleroderma lung study. Curr
Rheumatol Rep 2005;7(2):135–141.
Shmerling RH. Diagnostic tests for rheumatic disease: clinic utility revisited.
South Med J 2005;98(7):704–711.

Consider treatment
of interstitial lung
disease/alveolitis and/or
pulmonary hypertension

Siebold JR. Scleroderma. In Harris ED, Budd RC, Firestein GS, et al, eds.
Kelley’s Textbook of Rheumatology, 7 ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders,
2005:1279–1308.
Steen VD. Systemic sclerosis. Rheum Dis Clin North Am 1990;16(3):
641–654.
Steen VD, Medsger TA Jr. Severe organ involvement in systemic sclerosis
with diffuse scleroderma. Arthritis Rheum 2000;43(11):2437–2444.

