SCROTAL MASS

Scrotal masses can present clinically as a result of tumor,
trauma, and/or inflammation of the scrotal wall or its contents. The mass may be the result of an acute event or
noted incidentally by the patient or a sexual partner. The
key to diagnosis begins with consideration of the complete
differential diagnosis and appropriate management based
on clinical findings.
A. An accurate history of constitutional symptoms with
characterization of the onset and duration of urologic
symptoms allows the clinician to narrow the differential diagnosis of a scrotal mass considerably. A review
of the patient’s past medical history, family history,
sexual history, and surgical history, with particular attention to genitourinary tract instrumentation, is important in the workup. Initial laboratory tests of value
include urinalysis (UA), urine culture, and CBC. If
there is a question of sexually transmitted disease,
testing for gonococcus and chlamydia is indicated. If a
solid scrotal mass is identified by examination or ultrasound (US) that raises concern for testicular neoplasm, serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), beta-human
chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) should be obtained by the primary
physician or the urologic consultant.
Patients will present with either a painful or painless mass in the scrotum. Acute onset of pain with a
scrotal mass is most frequently associated with acute
epididymitis or torsion of the testicle or its appendages. A trauma history with marked testicular enlargement presents concern for organ rupture. Dull or
chronic scrotal pain can be associated with noninflammatory conditions such as varicocele or hydrocele. In
addition, approximately 30%–40% of patients with
testicular cancer present with a chief complaint of a
dull ache or a heavy sensation in the lower abdomen,
anal area, or scrotum. Scrotal pain may be either primary or referred. Because of their embryologic relation to the testes, pathology in the kidneys or retroperitoneum can present as pain referred to the scrotum
and is not associated with a mass. Scrotal edema is often a symptom of medical disease, which will cause
generalized scrotal enlargement bilaterally, whereas
other processes will localize to a hemiscrotum.
Physical examination of the scrotum and its contents
is performed by bimanual examination with the patient

560

standing. First, the scrotal skin should be examined for
sebaceous cysts, infected hair follicles, and other dermatologic abnormalities. Particularly in patients with
diabetes or who are immunocompromised, cellulitis of
the scrotal skin or abscess of the underlying soft tissue
may present as a painful indurated mass associated with
erythema and fluctuance. If the patient presents with a
lateralizing complaint, begin the examination with the
normal contralateral side. On testicular examination,
this provides a baseline and allows the examiner to appreciate the relative size, contour, and consistency of
the normal testis and the suspected gonad. Physical
examination of the testis is performed by careful palpation of the testis between the thumb and first two fingers of the examining hand. The noral testis is homogeneous in consistency, freely movable, and separable
from the epididymis. Any firm, hard, or fixed area
within the substance of the tunica albuginea should be
considered suspicious for tumor until proved otherwise. The epididymis lies posterior to the testicle and is
palpable as a distinct ridge of tissue. The spermatic
cord and inguinal canal should be palpated bilaterally to
exclude involvement of cord structures or hernia. Transillumination with a flashlight is particularly helpful in
determining whether a scrotal mass is solid or cystic. In
patients in whom the diagnosis is unclear or in whom a
hydrocele precludes adequate examination, imaging
studies should be used as an important second step.
Ultrasonography of the scrotum is essentially an extension of the physical examination. Any hypoechoic area
within the tunica albuginea is suspicious for testicular
cancer. Color flow Doppler ultrasonography will reveal
decreased or absent blood flow to the gonad in torsion
and typically will show increased flow in epididymoorchitis. Intrascrotal fluid collections are no barrier to the examination of the underlying testicular parenchyma by
ultrasonography.
B. The differential diagnosis of a painless scrotal mass
includes varicocele, hydrocele, and tumor. Less common diagnoses include hematoma and epididymal cyst
(spermatocele). The differential diagnosis of a painful
scrotal mass includes testicular torsion, epididymitis,
and epididymoorchitis. Although rare, torsion of a testicular appendage can present with a painful scrotal
mass. Inguinal hernias can present as a scrotal mass
with or without pain.
(Continued on page 562)

561
Patient with SCROTAL MASS

A History

Physical examination
Scrotal transillumination

B Differential diagnosis
Cont’d on p 563

562
C. Review of pathology:
Epididymitis: Epididymitis is inflammation of the
epididymis as a result of an infection or a sterile process. Infectious epididymitis is secondary to an ascending infection commonly seen in conjunction with
Chlamydia trachomatis or Neisseria gonorrhoeae infection in sexually active men !35 years or as a result
of urinary tract infection (UTI), prostatitis, or urethral
instrumentation in the elderly. Escherichia coli is the
most common cause of infectious epididymitis in boys
and the elderly. The typical presentation is acute or
subacute onset of scrotal pain and swelling and may be
associated with generalized constitutional symptoms.
The amount of swelling may make localization of the
epididymis difficult, in which case imaging to rule out
torsion may be necessary. Reflux of sterile urine is
thought to cause epididymal pain, which can be
chronic and may be associated with a nodular texture
or small mass in the epididymis. Sterile or chronic
epididymitis is managed with NSAIDs and scrotal
elevation; a 2- to 4-week course of a fluoroquinolone
can be helpful. The current recommendation for
treatment of epididymitis when chlamydia or gonococcus is suspected is ceftriaxone 250 mg IM once and
doxycycline 100 mg PO bid for a 10-day course. Finally, a 10-day course of fluoroquinolone is appropriate for treatment of infectious epididymitis when coliform organisms are suspected.
Epididymoorchitis: Epididymoorchitis is the result
of progression of an inflammatory process of the epididymis to involve the adjacent testicle. On examination, the testicle and epididymis will be tender and
difficult to distinguish as two distinct structures. In severe cases, the overlying scrotal skin will be erythematous and indurated. US will show characteristic hypervascularity of both structures, making the diagnosis
distinct from torsion, in which there will be low or absent blood flow. Supportive measures and antibiotic
treatment are the same as for infectious epididymitis.
Varicocele: A varicocele is a dilated and tortuous
vein or group of veins in the spermatic cord often
described as feeling like a “bag of worms.” Varicoceles
occur in 15% of men, predominantly on the left side,
and may become more obvious with the patient standing or with Valsalva and may disappear with the patient supine. Varicoceles are significant in that they
are associated with infertility and can cause pain, in
which case their management should be referred to a
urologist.
Inguinal hernia: Herniation of bowel or omentum
into the scrotum can produce a scrotal mass that may
present with or without pain. Careful physical examination with auscultation of bowel sounds in the
scrotum or successful hernia reduction can make the

diagnosis. If physical examination and US are equivocal, a CT scan is warranted. If symptomatic or
concerning for strangulation, referral to a general
surgeon is warranted.
Epididymal cyst: An epididymal cyst is usually an
incidental finding on routine physical examination in
adolescents. Epididymal cysts are smooth, round,
transilluminating structures generally found at the
head of the epididymis. Rarely, epididymal cysts may
enlarge enough to cause the patient pain, in which case
surgical removal is necessary. Large epididymal cysts
are referred to as spermatoceles.
Testicular torsion: Torsion must be the first consideration in any patient presenting with a painful scrotal
mass because delay in diagnosis can result in loss of the
testicle. Torsion refers to twisting of the spermatic cord
with vascular compromise, resulting in sudden onset of
pain and swelling of the affected testicle. A history of
trauma may be present. Torsion occurs most commonly in men between the ages of 12 and 20 years.
The characteristic high-riding position of the testicle
along with swelling and tenderness can make examination difficult and distinguishing torsion from epididymitis a challenge. Color flow Doppler ultrasonography
can easily make the diagnosis, but if torsion is seriously
considered, immediate referral to a urologist for surgical exploration and detorsion is mandatory.
Hydrocele: A hydrocele is a fluid collection within
the tunica vaginalis adjacent to the testes. The swelling
is uniform, involving one hemiscrotum, and transilluminates. Hydroceles can present as primary lesions or
as secondary phenomena. Of testicular tumors, 10%
present with reactive hydroceles, which can make diagnosis of the tumor difficult. If there is any question
as to whether transillumination is incomplete or a mass
is palpable within a hydrocele, US is recommended.
Testicular tumor: The vast majority of testis tumors
are germ cell tumors, which usually present as an enlarging testis, a testicular nodule, or testicular hardness
and induration. The diagnosis is made clinically and
confirmed with scrotal US. Treatment involves surgical
removal of the testis via an inguinal incision, and further therapy depends on classification of the tumor and
clinical stage.

References
Presti JC. Genital tumors. In Tanagho EA, McAninich JW, eds. Smith’s
General Urology. 16th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2004.
Richie JP, Steele GS. Neoplasms of the testis. In Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR,
Novick AC, et al, eds. Campbell-Walsh Urology, 9th ed. Philadelphia:
WB Saunders, 2006.
Tanagho EA. Physical examination of the external male genitalia. In
Tanagho EA, McAninich JW, eds. Smith’s General Urology, 16th ed.
New York: McGraw-Hill, 2004.

563
Patient with SCROTAL MASS
(Cont’d from p 561)

C Special investigations

Acute torsion

Testicular tumor

Scrotal US

Scrotal US

Varicocele

Laboratory tests

Semen analysis
in infertility
evaluation

AFP

LDH

Hydrocele

Spermatocele

US

hCG

Epididymitis

Inflammation of
scrotal wall

US and CBC US and CT scan
CBC and metabolic
panel

Hernia

