Secondary amenorrhea is arbitrarily defined as the absence of menses for 6 months or the equivalent of three previous cycle intervals, whichever is longer, in women who previously had menses. Exclude physiologic amenorrheas, such as pregnancy, the immediate postpartum state, lactation, and menopause. It is helpful to consider secondary amenorrhea as an abnormality in one of four areas: the outflow tract, including the uterus, cervix, and vagina; the ovaries; the anterior pituitary; and the hypothalamus. Take a careful history, including questions concerning menstrual history, surgical procedures, medication use, changes in weight or diet, exercise patterns, a history of hot flashes, and medical illnesses. On physical examination, pay attention to body habitus, secondary sexual characteristics, evidence of androgen excess, galactorrhea, visual fields, and evidence of endocrinopathies, and do a thorough pelvic examination. If localizing signs or symptoms are found, the investigation can be channeled as appropriate.

About 20% of cases of secondary amenorrhea are caused by hyperprolactinemia. Although galactorrhea may indicate this diagnosis, its absence is not reassuring, and all patients should be screened with a serum prolactin level. A number of physiologic and pharmacologic events can alter prolactin levels. Elevation can occur from any stress—physical or emotional. In fact, the stress of a blood draw may increase the level slightly. Levels should not be drawn after a recent breast examination because breast stimulation can increase prolactin. Prolactin also can be increased by many medications, including oral contraceptives, estrogens, phenothiazines, tricyclic antidepressants, metoclopramide, and benzodiazepines. The serum prolactin usually is <100 ng/ml if from one of these causes. If levels remain elevated after excluding these, investigate further.

The progestin challenge test is used to assess the endogenous estrogen level and the competence of the outflow tract; 10 mg medroxyprogesterone acetate (Provera) is given by mouth for 5 days. Withdrawal bleeding should occur within 2 days to 2 weeks if there is a sufficient estrogen level and a competent outflow tract. Any amount of bleeding is considered a positive test, but mild spotting implies low estrogen levels, and an evaluation for causes of hypoestrogenism is warranted. The presence of estrogen suggests that the major components of the hypothalamic, pituitary, ovarian, and uterine pathways are at least minimally functioning. The diagnosis of anovulation is made. Management of anovulation depends on whether the patient currently desires pregnancy or contraception. Because chronic unopposed estrogen can induce endometrial hyperplasia, the patient should receive progestin therapy (either in the form of oral contraceptive pills or cyclical progestin) to induce endometrial shedding on a regular basis.

If there is no withdrawal bleeding after a progestin challenge, there is either an outflow tract problem or insufficient estrogen. An estrogen-progestin challenge test can help differentiate between these two problems. Orally active estrogen is given to stimulate endometrial proliferation. An appropriate dose is 2.5 mg of conjugated estrogens daily for 21-25 days. A progestational agent (10 mg Provera) is given for the last 5–10 days to induce withdrawal. If no withdrawal bleeding occurs, there is a problem with the outflow tract, such as Asherman's syndrome or active endometritis. In a patient with a normal pelvic examination and no history of pelvic infections or trauma, including curettage, the estrogen-progestin challenge test may be eliminated.

Hypothalamic amenorrhea is the most common cause of secondary amenorrhea, occurring in approximately 60% of cases. It is most likely caused by a defect in the pattern of pulsatile gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) secretion. Hypothalamic amenorrhea is a diagnosis of exclusion, but clearly there are groups in which this occurs frequently, such as in patients with anorexia nervosa, strenuous exercisers, and patients under stress. If possible, the precipitating circumstances should be dealt with and eliminated. Often, reassurance and time is all that is needed. Follow these patients closely to ensure that nothing has been overlooked. If there is no evidence for an eating disorder, weight loss, or stress, MRI should be ordered to rule out a pituitary tumor. Consider estrogen replacement if the amenorrhea is not resolved in a reasonable time. If fertility is desired, clomiphene, Pergonal, and GnRH are often effective.

If luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) levels are high, ovarian failure is the most likely explanation. Patients <35 years should undergo karyotyping. If any portion of a Y chromosome is found, the chance of a gonadal malignancy is greatly increased. In rare circumstances, LH and FSH are elevated but the ovaries contain follicles (resistant ovary syndrome). However, in most cases, if the gonadotropins are elevated, premature ovarian failure can be diagnosed. Premature ovarian failure can be caused by autoimmune disease; consider and investigate this as appropriate. If the etiology of the ovarian failure is autoimmune, adrenal and thyroid function should also be tested. If there are no contraindications, hormonal replacement therapy should be used in premature ovarian failure to avoid the long-term sequelae of estrogen deficiency.

Hyperprolactinemia warrants MRI of the head. Various tumors, such as craniopharyngiomas and meningiomas, may cause hyperprolactinemia, but pituitary adenomas are the most common. Dopamine agonists, radiation therapy, and neurosurgery are therapeutic options for pituitary adenomas, depending on the size and extension of the tumor and the presence of symptoms. Excellent results usually are obtained with bromocriptine. Often, no tumor is found and careful observation is warranted. Consider a trial of bromocriptine, particularly if fertility is desired.

