SEPSIS


A. Patients with a life-threatening infection may present
with systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS),
which can signal severe sepsis and septic shock. It is
imperative to recognize this syndrome early and
institute prompt and aggressive treatment. The criteria
for SIRS are having two or more of the following
signs:
1. Fever (!38° C) or hypothermia ("36° C); tachycardia (heart rate [HR] !90 beats per minute)
2. Tachypnea with respiratory rate [RR] !20 breaths
per minute or Paco2 "32 mm Hg
3. Leukocytosis (WBC !12,000 cells/mm3), leukopenia
(WBC "4000 cells/mm3), or any blood count with
!10% bands
Sepsis is viewed as a continuum with progressive
severity. Patients with SIRS and evidence of infection
meet criteria for sepsis; patients with organ dysfunction have severe sepsis; and patients with sepsis and
refractory hypotension and perfusion abnormalities
despite resuscitation are in septic shock. The goal of
early therapy is to prevent progression of sepsis to
more severe forms.
Patients who are elderly or immunosuppressed may
not manifest the typical vital signs of SIRS; therefore a
high index of suspicion should guide management.
Elevated arterial lactate levels can indicate impending
sepsis in patients whose vital signs do not yet meet
criteria.
B. Aggressive resuscitation with fluids is the mainstay of
treatment for sepsis-spectrum disease. Patients with
sepsis have high volume resuscitation requirements as
a result of peripheral vasodilation and have elevated
tissue oxygen requirements. Early goal-directed therapy promotes rapid and aggressive treatment of sepsis,
similar to the “golden hour” approach to trauma
patients. Insert a central venous catheter and use crystalloid fluids to normalize blood pressure, with the
goal of keeping central venous pressure (CVP) between 8 and 12 mm Hg and mean arterial pressure
(MAP) between 40 and 90 mm Hg. If adequate CVP
and MAP goals cannot be met, or if pulmonary edema
develops, inotropic agents should be initiated early.
ABG measurement can determine the severity of
metabolic acidosis. Assess tissue perfusion by checking arterial lactate levels or mixed-venous oxygen saturation. Elevated lactate or low venous O2 saturation is
evidence that tissue perfusion is insufficient and further aggressive measures should continue.
334

C. Identifying the source of infection is key to effective
treatment. Obtaining a history and physical examination is the first step to identifying possible sources.
Host factors including immunosuppression, asplenia,
recent invasive procedures, and chronic illness are
important details. Pneumonia and urinary tract infection remain common causes of sepsis. Intraabdominal disease should always be considered. All
patients should have a chest radiograph; urinalysis;
standard laboratory tests, including CBC with differential, serum electrolytes, BUN and creatinine;
and hepatic panel. Blood cultures should be obtained
from two separate venipuncture sites and from any
indwelling catheters or lines. Patients with evidence
of pneumonia should have sputum Gram stain and
culture. Patients with evidence of urinary tract infections should have urine Gram stain in addition to
cultures.
D. Empiric parenteral antibiotic therapy should be instituted within 60 minutes of identification of a patient
with possible sepsis. The choice of agent depends on
the likely source of infection, local antibiotic resistance
patterns, and host factors. Initial antimicrobial spectra
should include gram-positive and gram-negative bacterial coverage. Additional coverage may be necessary
based on host factors such as neutropenia, HIV infection, end-stage renal disease, presence of catheters or
hardware, recent surgery, or travel history.
E. Further management of sepsis after initial resuscitation
includes intensive monitoring. If respiratory distress is
present, positive pressure ventilation may be required.
Relative adrenal insufficiency is common in patients
with sepsis; cortisol levels should be checked and
replacement corticosteroids should be administered in
patients who are unstable or in patients with a cosyntropin stimulation response "9 #g/dl. Aggressive glycemic
control should be instituted to keep glucose <150 mg/
dl. Anemia should be corrected by red cell transfusion.
Activated protein C has been proved to increase survival in patients with severe sepsis at high risk of death
but can be administered only to patients without risk of
bleeding.
F. Patients with evidence of localized infection, such as
abscess, should have definitive drainage or surgical
evaluation. Any obviously infected hardware should be
removed if possible.
G. Antibiotic therapy will need to be revised as culture
results or further history are obtained.

335
Patient with SEPSIS

A Determine severity of patient’s condition:

Sepsis: infection and systemic inflammatory
response syndrome (SIRS)
Two or more of the following signs:
T <36° C or >38° C
HR >90 beats/min
RR >20 breaths/min or PaCO2 <32 mm Hg
WBC >12,000 or <4000 cells/mm3, or >10% bands
Severe sepsis: sepsis and evidence of organ dysfunction
Septic shock: sepsis and refractory hypotension

B Early, aggressive resuscitation:

Rapid fluid resuscitation to keep
MAP >65 mm Hg
Supplemental oxygen
Assess arterial lactate, ABG
CVP monitoring
Inotropic agents
may be necessary

C Assess possible source
of infection:
Blood cultures
Chest radiograph
Urinalysis
Gram stain

D Empiric broad-spectrum
antibiotics

E Continued management in a monitored setting:
Assess cortisol: start stress-dose
steroids while awaiting cosyntropin
stimulation test
Glycemic control: keep glucose
<150 mg/dl
Intensive monitoring
Correct anemia
Activated protein C if patient is at
high risk of death and does not
have risk of bleeding

F Treat Obvious Sources of Infection:
Abscess Drainage
Hardware Removal
Surgery for Acute Abdominal
Pathology

G Revise antimicrobial coverage

when culture results are available

References
Bernard GR, Vincent JL, Laterre PF, et al. Efficacy and safety of recombinant human activated protein C for severe sepsis. N Engl J Med
2001;344:699–709.
Dellinger RP, Carlet JM, Masur H, et al. Surviving Sepsis Campaign
guidelines for management of severe sepsis and septic shock. Crit
Care Med 2004;32:858–873.

LaRosa SP. Sepsis: menu of new approaches replaces one therapy for all.
Cleve Clin J Med 2002;69(1):65–73.
Rivers E, Nguyen B, Havstad S, et al. Early goal-directed therapy in the
treatment of severe sepsis and septic shock. N Engl J Med
2001;345:1368–1377.

