A. Although a few patients will volunteer sexual difficulties, most will not. A detailed medical history should include a sexual history to elicit complaints. Ask general, nonjudgmental questions, including effects on current relationships, to open the discussion. Make no assumptions about a patient's sexual preferences or experiences.
B. Decreased libido can be associated with depression, other psychiatric disorders, or their medical treatment. Stress in relationships or work can also contribute. Psychiatric evaluation and counseling can help. Medical causes of decreased sexual desire include medications (e.g., antihypertensives or selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors [SSRIs], substance abuse, and acute and chronic illness. Hypogonadism is treatable with testosterone replacement therapy. Sex and/or marital therapy should be considered for patients with significant relationship problems (as either a cause or a result of decreased libido).
C. Erectile dysfunction, or impotence, can be classified as organic or psychogenic, although many men have a mixture of both. The presence of morning erections is highly specific for psychogenic impotence, although not very sensitive. There are a number of organic causes for erectile dysfunction, including endocrine, vascular, and neurologic disorders. Surgical procedures such as radical prostatectomy may result in erectile dysfunction as well. A careful history and physical will help elicit organic etiologies. Check testosterone level in organic impotence. Routine serologic screening for other endocrine disorders is not warranted in the absence of other indicators found in the history and physical.
D. Premature ejaculation is a common complaint among men who are young and sexually inexperienced. It is also seen in patients having relationship or situational stresses and is well known to occur with fatigue. Therapy was once limited to the pause (or hold) and squeeze technique in addition to increased sexual stimulation, which is thought to increase the latency period. SSRIs have shown efficacy in delaying ejaculation, and PDE5 inhibitors are now being studied as well. Sex therapy can be helpful in some cases. Absent ejaculation may be organic and a result of hypogonadism or a complication of prostate surgery. Retrograde ejaculation requires referral to urology. Rarely, anorgasmia occurs in the absence of hypogonadism and is best addressed by sex therapy.
E. Hypoactive sexual desire in women, as in men, can be associated with medications (e.g., antihypertensives, SSRIs), substance abuse, and chronic illness. It can accompany menopause (natural or surgical). Appropriate hormone replacement therapy (HRT) can improve sexual desire, especially if lack of desire is related to dyspareunia (painful intercourse) resulting from inadequate lubrication. Given the newly recognized risks of HRT, a physician must weigh the benefit against the risk. Women who have had bilateral oophorectomy or who suffer from severe androgen deficiency as in Addison's disease may benefit from androgen replacement therapy. Depression, difficulties with body image, and the maternal role also can decrease female desire. Reducing fatigue with the addition of regular exercise often is accompanied by an increase in sexual desire. A history of sexual abuse or domestic violence may present as hypoactive sexual desire and avoidance of sexual contact. Depression can be treated medically, although many antidepressants have decreased sexual desire as a prominent side effect (studies using PDE5 inhibitors to overcome this are under way). Psychiatric referral is appropriate for all women with a history of sexual abuse and may be appropriate for treatment of hypoactive sexual desire regardless of cause.
F. Anorgasmia is much more common in women than in men. Often it is a combination of inhibition relating to sex itself and a lack of knowledge about female sexual arousal. Education about anatomy and use of self-stimulation coupled with erotic materials may enhance a woman's sexual experience. Sex therapy can also be useful in these cases. Medications such as SSRIs or pelvic trauma also can lead to reduced ability to achieve orgasm.
G. Dyspareunia is a common sexual complaint of women. It is important to distinguish between insertional (just before or during penile penetration) and deep thrust dyspareunia. Insertional pain has a number of easily reversed causes such as vulvovaginitis, urethritis, and inadequate lubrication. Treatment with antibiotics when indicated and the use of topical estrogens in perimenopausal or postmenopausal women can eliminate the problem. Atrophic vaginitis often responds to estrogen replacement as well. Vulvar dystrophies, vulvar vestibulitis, and urethral syndromes require gynecologic referral. Pelvic inflammatory disease can be treated with antibiotics. Most other causes of deep thrust dyspareunia require gynecologic evaluation.
H. Vaginismus is a severe type of insertional dyspareunia. The patient complains of inability to achieve penetration—she may be unable to insert a tampon or tolerate a speculum examination—secondary to involuntary muscle contraction. If there is no history of sexual abuse, it may be related to fear and inhibition surrounding sex. Education about anatomy and sexual response coupled with insertion of progressively larger vaginal dilators may allow receptive penetration. Botulinum toxin is being studied as a potential medical therapy for severe cases. Sex therapy, psychiatric evaluation, or both may also be required. A history of sexual abuse demands psychiatric referral.

