SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED DISEASES

Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) are a major cause of
morbidity and a significant public health issue both domestically and internationally. Over 15 million cases of STDs
are reported annually in the United States alone. These
infections can have a devastating impact on the health
of individual patients. They also cause adverse social and
economic sequelae.
Health care providers play a critical role in diagnosis and
treatment of STDs. This chapter will provide a basic overview
of some of the more common STDs. HIV infection will be
discussed in detail in subsequent chapters.
A. Comprehensive initial evaluation of the patient presenting for treatment or screening for STDs must include
the following:
1. Detailed sexual history (number of sexual partners;
date of most recent sexual encounter, including oral
and anal sex; record of condom use; use of other
forms of contraception; and gender of partners)
2. Past history of STDs
3. History of treatment for STDs
4. Response to treatment
5. Current complaint (genital lesions, pruritus, abdominal pain, presence of discharge, odor and color of
discharge if present, vaginal soreness, dyspareunia,
dysuria, fever)
6. Duration of these complaints
7. Examination (skin, lymph nodes, mouth and throat,
abdomen, external genitalia, speculum examination,
evaluation of the rectum and perirectal region
Questions regarding sexual history should be framed in
an open-ended, nonjudgmental fashion. Emphasis should
be placed on counseling regarding safer sexual practices.
B. Human papillomavirus (HPV) (particularly types 16, 18,
31, 33, 35, or 45) has been strongly associated with the
development of cervical dysplasia and cervical cancer.
C. Partners of patients with suspected or proven chlamydial,
gonococcal, or Trichomonas infection should be treated
to prevent recurrence.
D. All patients who present for STD screening and treatment should be offered HIV testing. Treatment of
STDs may reduce the risk of HIV transmission.
E. Male urethritis is most commonly caused by Neisseria
gonorrhoeae. The most common cause of nongonococcal
urethritis is infection with Chlamydia trachomatis. Up to
30% of men with urethritis are infected with both
pathogens.
314

1. Gonococcal urethritis presents asymptomatically in
5% of cases. Evaluation should include urethral
smear. More than 4 WBCs per oil immersion field is
suggestive but not diagnostic of infection. Urethral
smear may also reveal intracellular gram-negative
diplococci consistent with gonococcus. Positive leukocyte esterase or !10 WBCs per high-power field
on a first-voided urine sample is also suggestive of
infection. Diagnosis should be confirmed by culture
of urethral discharge. Rapid assays utilizing nucleic
acid amplification can be obtained on a urine sample and are also widely used to confirm diagnosis.
2. Males infected with chlamydial urethritis are often
asymptomatic. Both !4 WBCs per oil immersion
field and pyuria are suggestive of infection. Diagnosis can be confirmed by rapid nucleic acid amplification on urethral swab or urine. If diagnosis cannot
be confirmed, then patients with urethritis should
be treated for both gonorrhea and chlamydial infection given the high rate of co-infection. Yearly
screening is advocated for sexually active young
males. Chlamydia is the most common cause of
epididymitis (swollen, red, and tender scrotum) in
males "35 years.
3. Other causes of nongonococcal urethritis are Mycoplasma genitalium, Ureaplasma urealyticum, and
Trichomonas vaginalis.
F. Cervicitis may present with discharge, vaginal pruritus,
dyspareunia, and burning. Both N. gonorrhoeae and C.
trachomatis infections are common causes of cervicitis.
On speculum examination mucopurulent discharge may
be noted on the endocervical canal. The majority of
women (!70%) who are infected with Chlamydia are
asymptomatic. Therefore, the CDC recommends annual
screening for all sexually active women regardless of
symptoms. Complications of infection include pelvic
inflammatory disease/salpingitis, ectopic pregnancy, and
infertility. Chlamydia can also cause urethritis in women.
Signs of urethritis include urethral discharge, meatal
redness, and swelling. Diagnosis of gonococcal cervicitis
is by culture, DNA probe, or amplification techniques.
Diagnosis of chlamydial cervicitis is accomplished by
direct monoclonal antibody staining (DFA), ELISA,
DNA probes or amplification techniques (polymerase
chain reaction or ligase chain reaction). Use of firstcatch urine specimens is a noninvasive means of diagnosing chlamydial and gonococcal infections.

315
Patient with Suspected SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED DISEASE

A Comprehensive history and physical examination:

Number of partners, most recent contact,oral/anal/
genital practices
Prior STDs and their treatment
Current complaints
Complete examination with attention to skin, eyes,
mouth, lymph nodes,external and internal
genitalia, anus, joints

B C

Genital ulcers
Cont’d on p 317

D Screen all patients for occult STDs:
HIV
Hepatitis B
Hepatitis C
Syphilis
Risk-reduction counseling
Pap smear for women

E Urethritis:

Consider N. gonorrhoeae,
Chlamydia, Mycoplasma,
Ureaplasma, and
Trichomonas
Nucleic acid amplification test
for gonorrhea and chlamydia
on urethral swab or urine
specimen
Throat swab for N. gonorrhoeae

G. Health care providers should be aware that infection
with N. gonorrhoeae or C. trachomatis can cause mucopurulent conjunctivitis and pharyngitis. Sexually active patients with conjunctivitis should be evaluated for
these infections. Throat swabs should be performed on
all patients who present for STD screening.
H. Bacterial vaginosis is caused by a polymicrobial superficial vaginal infection involving a loss of normal lacto-

F

G H

I Cervicitis vaginitis:

Consider N. gonorrhoeae,
Chlamydia, yeast, bacterial
vaginosis, and Trichomonas
Assess pH and wet prep for
trichomonads and clue cells
KOH stain for yeast
Nucleic acid amplication test for
gonorrhea and chlamydia on
cervical swab or urine
specimen

bacilli and an overgrowth of anaerobes. This infection
is characterized by clue cells, which are epithelial cells
coated with tiny coccobacillary forms.
I. Vaginal pH is usually !4.5 in cases of Trichomonas
infection. An abundance of leukocytes and motile,
flagellated trichomonads are noted on wet preparation
of vaginal secretions.
(Continued on page 316)

316
J. There are numerous infectious and noninfectious causes
of genital ulcers, including (but not limited to) herpes
simplex, Treponema pallidum, lymphogranuloma venereum (LGV), granuloma inguinale, HIV, Haemophilus
ducreyi, Behçet’s disease, and fixed drug eruptions. The
physical examination is insensitive in identifying the
underlying cause of genital ulcerations; therefore diagnostic testing is imperative.
K. Genital herpes is most commonly caused by herpes
simplex virus (HSV) II, although an increased incidence of genital HSV I has been noted. The characteristic finding of multiple vesicles on an erythematous
base may or may not be present on clinical examination. The gold standard for diagnosis is isolation of the
virus in tissue culture. A positive Tzanck preparation
revealing characteristic giant cells or intranuclear inclusions can also be used. DFA can distinguish between HSV I and HSV II. Serologic tests can be useful
if one obtains acute and convalescent serum. A rise in
antibody titer may be seen during recurrent infection.
L. The gold standard for the diagnosis of syphilis is darkfield examination (DFE). Samples can be taken from
mucocutaneous lesions (except lesions from the
oropharynx) or lymph nodes. Three consecutive DFEs
are required before a lesion can be considered to be
negative. Nontreponemal tests (VDRL and rapid
plasma reagent) are used for screening and for monitoring of response to therapy. Specific treponemal tests
(e.g., FTA-abs) detect antibody against T. pallidum and
should be used for confirmation of a positive nontreponemal test. In most patients, the specific treponemal
tests remain positive for life. False-negative tests are
found in HIV-positive patients, particularly when the
patient’s CD4 count is "200. PCR testing has also
been developed but is available only on a limited basis.
Neurosyphilis should be ruled out in patients with late
latent syphilis (!1 year from primary infection) by
clinical examination. Lumbar puncture should be considered when symptoms or examination are suggestive
of neurosyphilis.
M. Syphilitic chancres usually present as solitary, painless
lesions with a smooth base and raised borders. However, chancres can sometimes be painful, particularly if
secondarily infected. In patients with HIV co-infection,
multiple chancres may occur. The external genitalia is
most commonly involved. The perianal area, mouth,

N.

O.

P.

Q.

and anal canal may also be involved in women and in
homosexual men.
Treatment of primary, secondary, or syphilis of less than a
year’s duration is benzathine penicillin G 2.4 million U
IM # 1 dose. Patients allergic to penicillin should be
given doxycycline 100 mg PO bid # 2 weeks. Pregnant
patients who are allergic to penicillin should be skin
tested, and desensitization to penicillin should be undertaken. Latent syphilis is treated with benzathine penicillin
G 2.4 million U IM weekly for 3 weeks. Neurosyphilis is
treated with aqueous crystalline penicillin G 24 million U
IV daily # 10–14 days followed by penicillin G 2.4 million
U IM weekly # 3 weeks. Partner notification and screening is critical. Patients should be offered HIV testing.
A single complement fixation titer of !1:64 or a fourfold rise in titer supports the diagnosis of lymphogranuloma venereum. Microimmunofluorescence for
the L-type serovar is sensitive and specific. A titer of
!1:512 is diagnostic. Definitive diagnosis can be made
by aspiration of material from a bubo with growth in
cell culture.
Granuloma inguinale (caused by Calymmatobacterium
granulomatis) is a chronic, indolent, ulcerative infection of the skin and lymphatics. Although it is very rare
in the United States ("100 cases per year), infection
still occurs in tropical regions. Diagnosis is made by
the finding of intracellular Donovan bodies (oval rodshaped organisms) in mononuclear cells.
The genital ulceration caused by Haemophilis ducreyi
(chancroid) is typically exquisitely painful. Diagnosis is
made by culture on special nutrient media. Gram stain
may show characteristic “school of fish” gram-negative
coccobacilli.

References
Braverman PK. Sexually transmitted diseases in adolescents. Med Clinics
North Am 2000;84:869–889.
Emmert D, Kircher J. Sexually transmitted diseases in women. Postgrad
Med 2000;107(1):55–65. Available online at www.postgradmed.com/
index.php?art=pgm_01_2000?article=815.
Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R, eds. Principles and Practice of
Infectious Diseases, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone,
2005.
Workowski KA, Levine WC, Levine WC. U.S. Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention guidelines for the treatment of sexually transmitted diseases, an opportunity to unify clinical and public health
practice. Ann Intern Med 2002;137:255–262.

317
Patient with Suspected SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED DISEASE
(Cont’d from p 315)

J Genital ulcers:

Consider herpes simplex,
T. pallidum, H. ducreyi,
LGV, granuloma
inguinale, HIV
Noninfectious: Behçet’s
disease, fixed drug
eruptions

K Vesicles $ pain and pruritus
Consider herpes simplex
Viral culture, DFA, PCR,
or Tzanck preparation
Valacyclovir, famciclovir,
or acyclovir

L M

N Painless ulcers

O Unilateral inguinal

lymphoadenopathy $
suppuration (bubo)
Consider LGV
LGV serology
Doxycycline or
azithromycin

Consider syphilis
Serologic syphilis tests
Empiric benzathine penicillin

Q Exquisitely painful

genital ulcers
Consider chancroid
(H. ducreyi)
Ulcer Gram stain
and culture

P Painless red nodules, local

tissue mutilation
Consider granuloma
inguinale (donovanosis)
Biopsy to visualize
Donovan bodies
(phagocytes with
intracellular bacterial
inclusions)

