SHOULDER PAIN

A. Anterior glenohumeral dislocation, acromioclavicular
(AC) separation, and rotator cuff tear are often
strongly suggested by history and physical examination, with the former two conditions confirmable by
radiography. Rotator cuff tear usually includes the
supraspinatus tendon and as such, in a full tear, patients cannot initiate abduction of the arm from the
vertical position without prominent recruitment of the
deltoid and trapezius muscles. Rotator cuff tear can
also occur insidiously, usually after a prolonged period
of rotator cuff tendonopathy in older persons. Conversely, rotator cuff tendonopathy without tear of the
tendon can occur with acute trauma but is more often
idiopathic or from chronic overuse. Fractures of the
humerus, clavicle, and scapula need to be considered
in the setting of significant trauma. The more subtle
“superior labrum anterior-posterior” (SLAP) lesion is
a tear of the cartilaginous glenoid labrum that can occur after relatively minor trauma and requires more
advanced imaging than plain radiography to diagnose
conclusively.
B. Rotator cuff tendonitis and biceps tendonitis are both
extremely common, and the diagnosis can often be
made by physical examination. In evaluating the rotator cuff, it is valuable to check for pain with
resisted external and internal rotation, but the most
valuable tests are for impingement of the supraspinatus tendon. There are several variations of this test,
but the common feature they have is resisted elevation of the arm with the thumb facing down. Subacromial (or subdeltoid) bursitis also produces a
positive impingement sign, but there is usually more
tenderness at the lateral edge of the acromion than
in supraspinatus tendonitis. Tendonitis of the long
head of the biceps is readily diagnosed by local tenderness of the tendon (located in a groove on the
anterior shoulder, about halfway between the coracoid process and the lateral edge of the acromion)
and pain with resisted elbow flexion or resisted elevation of the arm with the thumb facing up. Calcific
tendonitis is an acute, self-limited disorder of unknown etiology that commonly affects the shoulder
tendons, usually featuring severe pain and exquisite
local tenderness and a characteristic radiographic appearance. Tendonopathies in general feature greater
pain with active motion or isometric contraction than
with passive motion. Adhesive capsulitis, also known
as “frozen shoulder,” is a painful disorder that often
follows immobilization but is frequently idiopathic.
522

It is characterized by limited motion of the shoulder
joint in all directions, which is suggested by examination but cannot be definitively diagnosed without
excluding frank arthritis. Primary osteoarthritis (OA)
of the glenohumeral joint is uncommon, but OA following rotator cuff tear and OA of the AC joint are
common. Inflammatory arthritis of the shoulder girdle is characteristic of polymyalgia rheumatica (PMR)
and is common in the seronegative spondyloarthropathies, but other causes of monoarthritis and polyarthritis need to be considered. The shoulder examination, like the hip examination, is not sensitive for
detecting joint effusion.
C. A thorough neurologic examination of the affected arm
is important in the evaluation of shoulder pain because
cervical radiculopathy from disk herniation or arthritis
often presents as shoulder pain.
D. Plain radiography of the shoulder using three standard
views is sufficient for most purposes: an anteroposterior (AP) view with the arm in internal rotation, an
AP view in external rotation, and an axillary view.
The AC joint and clavicle can usually be evaluated
using these views as well. To evaluate for AC joint
separation, a view with the patient standing and
holding a weight in the hand and/or a frontal view
allowing comparison of the AC joints may be helpful.
Rotator cuff tear is inferred by a narrowing of the
space between the acromion and the humeral head,
and OA changes are often present at the corresponding surfaces if the condition is chronic. Even with a
preserved acromiohumeral space, acromial spurring,
which can contribute to chronic rotator cuff impingement, is commonly seen. Calcific tendonitis is
apparent as an extraparenchymal radiodensity. Avascular necrosis, less common in the shoulder than in
the hip and knee, is usually not apparent by plain
radiography for about 6 weeks after onset. Cervical
spine films are indicated if a neurologic deficit is
detected; AP and lateral views may be sufficient to
diagnose degenerative disease, but evaluation of
neural foramina requires oblique views and, usually,
more advanced imaging modalities.
E. CT and MRI are both more sensitive than plain radiography for diagnosing fractures, but there is less often
need for using them for this purpose in the shoulder
than in the hip and pelvis. MRI is the technique of
choice for delineating rotator cuff pathology, but
it needs to be done only if diagnosis is in doubt or surgery is being considered. Ultrasonography is used for

523
Patient with SHOULDER PAIN
History
Physical examination

A History of trauma
Consider:
Fracture
Dislocation
AC joint separation
Rotator cuff tear

B No history of trauma

No pain on
shoulder examination

Pain on examination

Consider:
Rotator cuff
tendonitis
Biceps tendonitis
Calcific tendonitis
Adhesive capsulitis
(frozen shoulder)
Inflammatory arthritis:
gout, septic joint, PMR,
seronegative
spondyloarthropathy
Avascular necrosis
Metastatic disease
OA
Chronic rotator cuff tear

C Abnormal

neurologic
examination

Consider:
Cervical
radiculopathy

Normal
neurologic
examination

Exclude:
Cholecystitis
Myocardial
infarction

D Radiography

Diagnosis made

Diagnosis uncertain

E MRI
F Consider:

Image-guided shoulder aspiration

diagnosis of rotator cuff tears, but its value depends on
the experience of the operator. MRI is the best technique for diagnosing nerve root compression, early
avascular necrosis, and shoulder joint effusion.
F. Aspiration of the shoulder joint, under imaging guidance, is needed if there is suspicion of an infected
joint. Such suspicion is increased by the presence of
acute-onset, atraumatic, severe pain, particularly with
physical examination, or radiographic evidence of effusion, and/or fever and other signs of infection.

References
Burbank KM, Stevenson JH, Czarnecki GR, Dorfman J. Chronic shoulder pain: part I. Evaluation and diagnosis. Am Fam Physician 2008;
77:453–460.
Burbank KM, Stevenson JH, Czarnecki GR, Dorfman J. Chronic shoulder pain: part II. Treatment. Am Fam Physician 2008;77:493–497.
Matsen FA III. Clinical practice: rotator-cuff failure. N Engl J Med
2008;358:2138–2147.
Quillen DM, Wuchner M, Hatch RL. Acute shoulder injuries. Am Fam
Physician 2004;70:1947–1954.

