SICK EUTHYROID SYNDROME


Changes in the function of the hypothalamic-pituitarythyroid axis and in thyroid hormone transport and metabolism are common in patients with nonthyroidal illness.
The magnitude of these changes usually correlates with
the severity of the illness. Changes include reduced activity of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis and reduced extrathyroidal production of triiodothyronine (T3).
A. The earliest physiologic change in thyroid function
that occurs during illness is a decreased concentration
of free T3. Low free T3 levels result from decreased
concentrations of 5-monodeiodinase, the enzyme that
catalyzes the conversion of thyroxine (T4) to T3. High
concentrations of cortisol and free fatty acids, present
during illness, inhibit the activity of this enzyme.
Changes in the activity of the 5-monodeiodinase also
result in higher levels of reverse T3, which is used in
research studies to help distinguish nonthyroidal illness from true central hypothyroidism. High reverse
T3 levels correlate with increased mortality in severe
nonthyroidal illness.
B. Thyrotropin (or thyroid-stimulating hormone [TSH])
levels also may be normal to low. Low TSH occurs in
patients with the most severe nonthyroidal illness.
Although most of these patients have TSH levels at the
low end of normal, TSH may be undetectable in some.
This may be followed by low free T4 and TSH concentrations, resulting in transient central hypothyroidism.
The central and peripheral changes can occur independently of each other. Together these changes result in a
reduction of the level of T3 that is speculated to represent a beneficial adaptation to illness, conserving energy and limiting tissue catabolism.
The finding of very low TSH and low total T4 and T3
levels suggests altered pituitary or hypothalamic responsiveness to circulating thyroid hormone levels.
TSH levels may also be low among patients treated
with dopamine or corticosteroids. During the recovery
period, TSH levels return to normal or may even increase transiently before returning to normal.
TSH levels can be mildly to moderately elevated during nonthyroidal illness, particularly during the recovery
phase. In combination with very low serum free T4
values, an elevated TSH level suggests primary hypothyroidism, as does finding an enlarged thyroid gland.
Normal changes in thyroid hormones that are common during illness must be distinguished from those
resulting from thyroid disease, which are appropriately
sought in patients for other reasons. Secondary
148

(central) hypothyroidism can mimic the changes of
nonthyroidal illness, but it is very rare. Additionally, an
elevated TSH, particularly when !20 "U/ml, may be
considered indicative of underlying primary hypothyroidism unless the patient is in the recovery phase of
his or her illness.
C. The diagnosis of secondary hypothyroidism during severe illness is challenging. In patients with severe illness, TSH and total T4 and T3 values are usually low.
These patients are often given medications that inhibit
TSH, such as dopamine and glucocorticoids. If the
levels are very low, pituitary dysfunction should be
considered more strongly and repletion with corticosteroid and thyroid hormone supplements may be indicated. Additional tests, including measurement of
cortisol, gonadotropin, and prolactin levels, may clarify
the cause of unusually low thyroid tests. If the cortisol
and prolactin levels are high, as would be expected in
stressful situations, no intervention is needed. T3, T4,
and TSH levels should be tested again when the illness
is resolved or improved.
D. Although severe nonthyroidal illness may become maladaptive, the limited data available suggest that administration of thyroid hormone to patients with nonthyroidal
illness does not improve the outcome of their illness. In
studies where supraphysiologic doses of T3 were given
for 1 day following bypass surgery, the cardiac index was
slightly higher and systemic vascular resistance was
slightly lower in patients given T3 as compared with patients given a placebo; however, neither morbidity nor
mortality differed between groups. Patients with primary
hypothyroidism or very low thyroid hormone levels may
benefit from replacement. However, evidence does not
support the routine treatment of patients suspected to
have sick euthyroidism with thyroid hormone.

References
Camacho PM, Dwarkanathan AA. Sick euthyroid syndrome. What to do
when thyroid function tests are abnormal in critically ill patients. Postgrad Med 1999;105(4):215–219.
Chopra IJ. Euthyroid sick syndrome: is it a misnomer? J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 1997;82:329.
Stathatos N, Wartofsky L. Perioperative management of patients with
hypothyroidism. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 2003;32(2):
503–518.
Utiger RD. Altered thyroid function in nonthyroidal illness and surgery—
to treat or not to treat? N Engl J Med 1995;333:1562–1563.
Wartofsky L, Burman KD, Ringel MD. Trading one “dangerous dogma” for
another? Thyroid hormone treatment of the “euthyroid sick syndrome.”
J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1999;84:1759–1760.

149
Patient with SICK EUTHYROIDISM

A Free T4

Low

B Measure
TSH

C Very
low

Consider
secondary
hypothyroidism
or use of
dopamine

Measure
prolactin and
random cortisol

D Low or

normal

Sick
euthyroid
syndrome
likely

High
See Hyperthyroidism (p 140)

High
(5–20 "U/L)

Very high
(!20 "U/L)

Consider
recovery phase
of sick
euthyroidism or
primary
hypothyroidism

Primary
hypothyroidism
most likely

