A. "Soft-tissue rheumatism” is a spectrum of disorders that includes both focal pain associated with easily defined nonarticular musculoskeletal structures (tendonitis and bursitis) and generalized pain syndromes that may be manifestations of underlying diseases but more often are more commonly of idiopathic origin and no known pathology or pathophysiology.
B. Periarticular pain, in contrast to articular pain, is often reproduced on active but not passive joint movement, particularly in tendonitis or muscle strain. Pain with passive movement, if it occurs, should be with increasing stretch of the affected tendon. Even more suggestive of tendonitis or muscle strain is pain produced by isometric use of an involved muscle and tendon because the joint does not move. Irritated or damaged tendons are usually not visibly inflamed (no redness or swelling) unless in the setting of significant trauma or an inflammatory disease (especially the seronegative spondyloarthropathies), but there is often point tenderness. Bursitis features point tenderness and sometimes swelling and redness, at particular locations, including the front of the patella (prepatellar), the point of the elbow (olecranon), the lateral aspect of the shoulder (subdeltoid or subacromial), the medial aspect of the proximal tibia (anserine), the greater trochanter of the femur (trochanteric), and the ischial tuberosity (ischial). There is often a history of chronic or subacute trauma. Pain is usually but not always greater with active use of tendons near the bursa and is worsened by stretch (e.g., full flexion of the elbow in olecranon bursitis). The prepatellar and olecranon bursae are susceptible to infection and gout, so bursitis associated with swelling and redness at these sites should be aspirated to rule out infection and to evaluate for crystal deposition. Ligamentous sprain usually features a history of acute stretch injury, and examination features point tenderness and pain much greater with stretch of the ligament than with the opposite movement. Joint laxity may be apparent in a substantial or complete tear.
C. A generalized pain syndrome merits a comprehensive review of systems and physical examination to assess the likelihood of such diseases as systemic lupus, thyroid and parathyroid disease, metabolic myopathies (glycogen storage diseases and others), vitamin D deficiency, hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection, and multiple sclerosis. Practitioners differ greatly on how much laboratory evaluation to do related to these considerations. In our opinion, it is reasonable to measure thyroid-stimulating hormone(TSH), creatine kinase (CK), calcium, 25-OH vitamin D, and HCV antibodies; general laboratory testing of CBC, BUN, creatinine, electrolytes, and liver function is often done as well. ESR, C-reactive protein (CRP), and ANA are useful if they are negative, but moderately positive results are very common in the healthy population.
D. Fibromyalgia is a common idiopathic disorder with no known pathology, characterized by widespread pain and tenderness on examination in a number of characteristic areas, including the trapezii, the attachment of neck extensors to the occiput (and other areas of the neck and upper back), the joining of the second rib to the sternal cartilage, the upper outer buttock, the lateral elbow, the lateral hip near the greater trochanter, and the medial knee. Many patients are tender at other or all soft-tissue locations as well. There is often associated sleep disorder, depression, lack of exercise, chronic fatigue, headache, irritable bowel syndrome, and sometimes another, locally painful condition of definable cause. These factors may play a role in amplifying pain perception pathways, currently a popular working model for the disorder.
E. Intraarticular pain is usually experienced on both passive and active motion. Inflammatory arthritis is more likely than osteoarthritis to feature soft-tissue swelling, joint effusion, morning stiffness, and signs of inflammatory illness in other organ systems or systemically. Laboratory tests can be helpful as noted. See the chapters Monoarticular Arthritis and Polyarticular Arthritis polyarthritis and monoarthritis.

