SOLITARY PULMONARY NODULE

A. A solitary pulmonary nodule (SPN) is a lesion !3 cm
in diameter completely surrounded by pulmonary
parenchyma and without other abnormalities. An incidental nodule is an uncommon finding in routine
chest radiographs, but it is an increasingly common
finding on CT scans. Although the majority of these
lesions are benign, the possibility that the lesion represents a malignancy cannot be ignored. The 5-year
survival for stage IA lung cancer with resection is
60%–80%, which contrasts with the dismal overall
survival of lung cancer, which is 5%–16%. Despite
these figures, screening has not been proved to reduce
mortality from lung cancer and cannot be routinely
recommended. Large-scale studies of the value of
CT screening are currently ongoing and may lead to a
different conclusion.
B. In addition to bronchogenic carcinoma, the differential
diagnosis also includes other tumors such as carcinoid
and metastatic disease. The most common benign cause
of SPN in most series is granuloma, often resulting from
prior infection from endemic fungi or mycobacterium.
Other etiologies include chronic inflammation; fibrosis;
benign neoplasms such as hamartomas and fibromas;
infections such as pneumonia, round pneumonia,
abscess, echinococcus, and Dirofilaria; inflammatory
lesions such as Wegener’s and rheumatoid nodules; and
miscellaneous causes such as bronchogenic cysts, amyloid, intrapulmonary lymph nodes, rounded atelectasis,
and mucoid impaction.
C. Standard practice dictates that stability over 2 years
indicates the lesion is likely benign and no further
follow-up is necessary. Previous stability in imaging does
not always obviate the need for follow-up because some
malignancies, such as bronchoalveolar cell carcinoma
(BAC), can grow slowly. Thus, studies that are "2 years
prior to the current film may be helpful, especially for
lesions that do not appear entirely solid.
D. If the initial diagnosis was not made by a high-resolution
chest CT, one should be obtained. A high-resolution
CT scan allows better estimation of lesion size, calcification, and other characteristics. The addition of IV contrast is recommended by some experts because certain
benign etiologies, such as arteriovenous fistulas, are
more clearly identified. A CT scan may also reveal an
alternative diagnosis. Commonly, multiple nodules are
discovered and these should be approached differently
than the SPN (see the section on multiple pulmonary
nodules).
E. Risk assessment involves radiographic and patient
factors. Larger lesions are usually malignant; very small
(!5 mm) lesions are nearly always benign. Laminated,
496

central, or popcorn calcification; smooth borders; and
the presence of fat or cartilage are characteristic of
benign lesions. The corona radiata sign, a spiculated
appearance, thick-walled cavitation, and eccentric or
stippled calcification are consistent with a malignancy.
Clinical factors such as age, prior malignancy, hemoptysis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD),
certain environmental exposures, and history of lung
cancer in a first-degree relative also increase the chances
that the nodule represents cancer. Several studies have
outlined approaches for risk stratification based on
these characteristics; however, none have been universally accepted.
F. Patients at low risk (without any of the previously
mentioned risk factors) can be followed clinically
and radiographically. Historically, a repeat CT chest
at 3, 6, 9, 12, and 24 months has been recommended. Recently published guidelines from the
Fleischner Society suggest fewer CT scans may be
feasible for lesions !8 mm. According to these recommendations, no repeat CT scan is necessary for
lesions !5 mm in the absence of other risk factors.
G. Patients at moderate risk generally warrant further investigation. One exception may be when the clinician suspects an inflammatory or infectious etiology. In this case,
a repeat CT scan in 4–6 weeks after appropriate therapy
can demonstrate resolution and obviate further evaluation. For the remainder of the patients, options often
depend on the specifics of the location of the lesion, patient characteristics, and the expertise at a given institution. Positron emission tomography (PET) scans have
good sensitivity ("95% in some studies) and good specificity for lesions "1 cm. False-negative results can occur
with slowly growing tumors, and false-positive results can
occur in lesions with high metabolic activity, such as infection. CT-guided transthoracic needle aspiration may
be especially useful in peripheral lesions, with a high
sensitivity (approximately 90%) for malignancy, although
it is less helpful for benign causes of SPN. Endobronchial lesions or lesions with a “feeding bronchus” may be
best sampled by bronchoscopy. Finally, sputum cytology
is noninvasive and is helpful if positive, although the
sensitivity is quite low.
H. Most patients at high risk should have the SPN
resected. This is usually feasible via video-assisted
thoracic surgery (VATS) instead of standard thoracotomy,
with less morbidity. In those in whom the risk of surgery
is prohibitive or in those who decline surgery, alternatives for treatment of malignancy do exist and may include radiation, chemotherapy, and novel therapies such
as radiofrequency ablation.

497
Patient with SOLITARY PULMONARY NODULE

A

B Lesion !3 cm surrounded
by lung parenchyma
in absence of other
abnormalities

C Previous chest imaging

available, demonstrating
stability for "2 years?

No

Yes

D High-resolution
chest CT

E Risk assessment
for malignancy
based on patient
and radiologic
characteristics

F Low risk
Serial high-resolution
CT scans for 1–2 yr
(see text)

Benign lesion

Alternative diagnosis

No further workup
necessary

G Moderate risk

H High risk

Additional testing:
PET
Transthoracic needle
aspiration
Bronchoscopy
No diagnosis

Benefits of
surgery outweigh
risks of resection?

Yes

No

Thoracic surgery
referral for VATS/
thoracotomy

Consider less invasive
diagnosis/treatment
(see text)

References
Benjamin MS, Drucker EA, McLoud TC, et al. Small pulmonary nodules:
detection at chest CT and outcome. Radiology 2003;226(2):489–493.
Bielawski BC, Harrington D, Joseph E. A solitary pulmonary nodule with
zoonotic implications. Chest 2001;119(4):1250–1252.
Henschke CI, Yankelevitz DF, Reeves AP, et al. CT screening for lung
cancer: suspiciousness of nodules according to size on baseline scans.
Radiology 2004;231(1):164–168.
Libby DM, Smith JP, Altorki NK, et al. Managing the small pulmonary
nodule discovered by CT. Chest 2004;125(4):1522–1529.
MacMahon H, Austin JH, Gamsu G, et al. Guidelines for management of
small pulmonary nodules detected on CT scans: a statement from the
Fleischner Society. Radiology 2005;237(2):395–400.

Martini N, Bains MS, Burt ME, et al. Incidence of local recurrence
and second primary tumors in resected stage I lung cancer. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg 1995;109(1):120–129.
Ost D, Fein AM, Feinsilver SH. Clinical practice. The solitary pulmonary
nodule. N Engl J Med 2003;348(25):2535–2542.
Schreiber G, McCrory DC. Performance characteristics of different
modalities for diagnosis of suspected lung cancer: summary of
published evidence. Chest 2003;123(1 Suppl):115S–128S.
Spiro SG, Silvestri GA. One hundred years of lung cancer. Am J Respir
Crit Care Med 2005;172(5):523–529.
Tan BB, Flaherty KR, Kazerooni EA, et al. The solitary pulmonary
nodule. Chest 2003;123(1 Suppl):89S–96S.
Yankelevitz DF, Henschke CI. Does 2-year stability imply that pulmonary
nodules are benign? AJR Am J Roentgenol 1997;168(2):325–328.

