SPINAL CORD COMPRESSION

Guillermo Gonzalez-Osete, MD, and Manuel Modiano, MD

Approximately 5% of systemic cancers involve the spinal
cord. Spinal cord compression is a medical emergency in
which a delay in treatment often causes irreversible loss of
neurologic function.
A. Tumors that most commonly affect the spinal cord are of
the lung, breast, prostate, and lymph nodes. Myeloma,
melanoma, and genitourinary tract tumors less commonly affect the spinal cord. An important presenting
sign is back pain, either of recent onset or old pain that
has returned or increased. Pain is present in 97% of all
cord compressions, followed in frequency by weakness
(76%) and paresthesias (57%) along a bilateral or unilateral dermatomal distribution. Associated bowel and
bladder dysfunction is seen in 51% of patients with more
advanced disease. A few patients have no history of
cancer and pain as the initial presentation.
B. Even when the physical examination does not reveal
signs of spinal cord compression, obtain plain radiographs of the painful region to rule out neoplastic
involvement. If the plain films are negative, consider
nonneoplastic causes (rheumatoid arthritis, aortic aneurysm, spondylosis, herniated disc, spinal tuberculosis,
osteoarthritis, osteomyelitis). Proceed with a detailed
workup if there is pain with tenderness to percussion
over the affected vertebral body, bilateral muscle weakness in the extremities, sensory changes, loss of deep
tendon reflexes, or bowel or bladder incontinence.
C. If plain films reveal a lesion in a painful area, follow with
MRI or myelography, which have comparable sensitivity
and specificity. Myelography is an invasive procedure
that requires technical skill and the use of contrast. MRI
is not invasive and helps in detecting intramedullary lesions, but patients may have difficulty lying still on the
hard table or may have claustrophobia. Also, MRI is not
always available. If these studies show a lesion, there is
a 90% probability of cord compression.
D. If MRI is negative and clinical findings suggest cord
involvement, proceed with myelography. Myelography
helps determine the upper and lower extent of the
lesion and ascertains whether there is more than one
lesion. If a complete block is found on lumbar myelography, cisternal myelography or MRI is required to
identify the upper end of the block. If both studies are
negative, there is no cord compression.
E. The choice of treatment depends on the type of tumor,
the level of the block, the rapidity of onset and duration of symptoms, previous treatment, and the clinical
experience available. This medical emergency is treated
292

vigorously with radiation or surgery in addition to
steroids. Our current recommendation is to give 10 mg
IV dexamethasone immediately, follow with 4 mg every 6 hours daily for at least 72 hours, and then rapidly
taper as tolerated. Begin radiotherapy immediately
after the diagnosis is established. The earlier a lesion is
detected and treated, the better the functional outcome. Response rates are 30%–80%. The total dose of
radiation is 3000–4000 Gy delivered over 2–4 weeks.
F. Consider surgery (laminectomy, stabilization) when
there is (1) no histologic diagnosis and cord compression is the presenting sign of cancer, (2) history of
radiation therapy to the affected area, (3) neurologic
progression of disease despite steroids and radiotherapy, (4) instability requiring fixation, or (5) a high
cervical lesion. Some more recent articles have reported improved outcomes with surgery followed by
radiotherapy. This is a consideration especially in patients who are expected to have longer life expectancy
and are in general good physical condition to tolerate
such a procedure. After surgery, give radiotherapy to
avoid recurrences. Initial response to combined surgery and radiation is 20%–100%, depending on tumor
type and timing of treatment. The best prognostic index for eventual recovery of function is pretreatment
status: 60% of patients who are ambulatory at diagnosis remain so postoperatively, whereas only 7% of
those who are paraplegic at diagnosis are ambulatory
after treatment.
G. When plain films are negative and physical examination
is not definitive, adjust pain medications and observe.
If pain persists or worsens or if the history is highly
suspicious, perform MRI and proceed accordingly.
References
Gilbert RW, Kim J-H, Posner JB. Epidural spinal cord compression from
metastatic tumor: diagnosis and treatment. Ann Neurol 1978;3:40.
Maranzano E, Latini P, Checcaglini F, et al. Radiation therapy in metastatic
spinal cord compression. Cancer 1991;67:1333.
Patchell RA, Tibbs PA, Regine WF, et al. Direct decompressive surgical
resection in the treatment of spinal cord compression caused by
metastatic cancer: a randomised trial. Lancet 2005;366(9486):
643–638; comment Lancet 2005;366(9486):609–610.
Rodichok L, Harper GR, Ruckdeschel JC, et al. Early diagnosis of spinal
epidural metastases. Am J Med 1981;70:1181.
Wasserstrom W, Glass PJ, Posner JB. Diagnosis and treatment of leptomeningeal metastases from solid tumors: experience with 90 patients.
Cancer 1982;49:759.
Willson JKV, Masaryk T. Neurologic emergencies in the cancer patient.
Semin Oncol 1989;16:490.
Young RF, Post EM, King GA. Treatment of spinal epidural metastases.
J Neurosurg 1980;53:741.

293
Patient with Suspected SPINAL CORD COMPRESSION

A History
B Physical examination:

Pain
Tenderness
Weakness
Sensory
Abnormal deep tendon
reflexes

Absence of physical signs:
Consider other causes

Plain films of spine

G Negative

Positive

C

Adjust pain
medication

MRI/Myelography

D Negative

Positive

Pain present

E
Myelography

Positive

Negative

Treatment

Follow-up

Steroids
Radiotherapy

F Neurologic

progression
Previous radiotherapy
No histologic
diagnosis
Consider:
Surgery

Persistent pain
with tenderness
or
Highly suspicious
history
MRI

Treat According
to Findings

