STABLE ANGINA

Chronic stable angina is most commonly a manifestation of
progressive obstruction of the coronary arteries by atheromatous plaque. Management of stable angina can be approached
through lifestyle, pharmacologic, and invasive means aimed
at reducing the imbalance of myocardial oxygen supply
versus demand, delaying the progression of atherosclerosis,
and stabilizing vulnerable coronary atheroma. Discussion
among physicians and patients regarding the goals and risks
of therapy is essential in the management of this condition.
A. The history and physical examination should be targeted
to determine the severity and pattern of symptoms, underlying risk factors, concomitant exacerbating diseases,
and signs or symptoms of left ventricular (LV) dysfunction. A fasting lipid profile, blood glucose, and ECG
should be obtained. When possible, correct exacerbating medications/conditions, including anemia, hyperthyroidism, and tachyarrhythmia.
B. Behavioral risk factor assessment and modifications are
essential; this includes diet restrictions, exercise, weight
loss, and smoking cessation.
C. Preventive pharmacologic therapies should be instituted
in cases in which lifestyle modifications are not sufficient. All patients without contraindication should take
aspirin for secondary prevention. Blood pressure and
dyslipidemia should be controlled to target for those
with coronary artery disease (CAD) (Joint National
Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and
Treatment of High Blood Pressure [JNC 7] and
National Cholesterol Education Program [NCEP]).
D. Risk assessment should be initiated. If evidence of LV
dysfunction or high-risk CAD is present by history, examination, chest x-ray, or ECG, cardiac catheterization
may be considered. If risk stratification is incomplete,
assess LV function and perform stress testing (unless
contraindications exist).
E. Stress testing is considered to confirm the diagnosis
in those with intermediate probability of CAD, to
provide additional prognostic information needed to
guide management, and to aid in directing intervention in patients with prior revascularization. Exercise
testing is preferred to pharmacologic stress testing
because the former provides valuable functional data.
Exercise ECG is the first line if the ECG is interpretable. Imaging enhances prognostic assessment by
localizing and quantifying the extent of ischemia
and prior infarction and is necessary if the ECG is
uninterpretable.
F. Assessment of symptom severity (and responsiveness
to therapy) along with prognosis guides therapy for
stable angina.
66

G. Pharmacologic therapy should be instituted for persistent symptoms. A beta blocker is generally preferred as
initial therapy unless contraindications exist. Calcium
antagonists may be preferred in specific situations such
as pulmonary disease (chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease, asthma), conduction abnormality (dihydropyridine), and vasospastic angina. Long-acting nitrates may
be added for persistent symptoms. Combined therapy
with a beta blocker and long-acting nitrates is superior
to use of either agent alone for symptom relief.
H. The method of revascularization (percutaneous coronary
intervention [PCI] vs. coronary artery bypass grafting
[CABG]) is addressed once significant coronary disease
is identified by angiography. CABG is preferred for certain anatomic subsets, in particular in those with a large
territory of jeopardized myocardium, in patients with
diabetes mellitus, in those with LV dysfunction, and in
patients with lesions not amenable to PCI. The patient’s
surgical risk must also be considered when deciding
among methods of intervention.
I. The patient’s clinical status and symptom severity
should be reassessed after medical or mechanical intervention. Patients who experience significant symptoms
after maximal medical therapy should be considered for
angiography and intervention. For patients who have
been revascularized to the extent possible and still have
significant symptoms despite maximal medication, alternative approaches (spinal cord stimulation, etc.) can
be considered.
References
The BARI Investigators. Seven-year outcome in the Bypass Angioplasty
Revascularization Investigation (BARI) by treatment and diabetic
status. J Am Coll Cardiol 2000;35:1122–1129.
Beller GA, Zaret BL. Contributions of nuclear cardiology to diagnosis and
prognosis of patients with coronary artery disease. Circulation
2000;101:1465–1478.
Califf RM, Armstrong PW, Carver JR, et al. 27th Bethesda Conference:
matching the intensity of risk factor management with the hazard for
coronary disease events. Task Force 5. Stratification of patients into
high, medium and low risk subgroups for purposes of risk factor management. J Am Coll Cardiol 1996;27:1007–1019.
Gibbons RJ, Abrams J, Chatterjee K, et al. ACC/AHA 2002 guideline
update for the management of patients with chronic stable angina—
summary article: a report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force on practice guidelines (Committee on the Management of Patients With Chronic Stable Angina).
J Am Coll Cardiol 2003;41:159–168.
Heidenreich PA, McDonald KM, Hastie T, et al. Meta-analysis of trials
comparing beta-blockers, calcium antagonists, and nitrates for stable
angina. JAMA 1999;281:1927–1936.
Lee TH, Boucher CA. Clinical practice. Noninvasive tests in patients with
stable coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med 2001;344:1840–1845.
Yusuf S, Zucker D, Peduzzi P, et al. Effect of coronary artery bypass graft
surgery on survival: overview of 10-year results from randomised trials
by the Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Surgery Trialists Collaboration.
Lancet 1994;344:563–570.

67
Patient with STABLE ANGINA*

A History and

ECG and laboratory testing
(fasting lipids, glucose,
suspected exacerbating
conditions, e.g., anemia?

physical examination

Unstable

Stable
Correct exacerbating
conditions

Refer for acute care

D Assess prognosis

B Assess risk factors

Adequate information
on prognosis available?
Yes

C

Risk Factor Modification:
Behavioral
Diet/Weight Reduction
Exercise
Smoking Cessation
Pharmacologic
Aspirin
Treatment of Hypertension
Treatment of Dyslipidemia
Management of Diabetes

No

E Stress test

(exercise or
pharmacologic?
with or without
imaging

Assess LV function

F Assess severity

High-risk
findings?
Yes

Consider cardiac
catheterization
Anatomy consistent with
superior outcome with
CABG (LM disease, 3 VD
with LV dysfunction?, or
not amenable to PCI?

Mild/moderate
severe symptoms

No

G

Continue management
of risk factors

of symptoms

None

Pharmacologic Therapy for Symptoms
Beta Blocker (First Line if No Contraindications?
Calcium Agonist (First Line if Vasospasm?
Long-Acting Nitrate
Sublingual Nitroglycerin as Needed

I Reassess

Refractory

symptoms

H

No

Improved

Revascularization for
Symptoms/High-Risk
PCI

Yes
Surgical candidate?
No

Yes
SURGICAL
REVASCULARIZATION
Go to

Go to

Refractory symptoms not
amenable to PCI or CABG

H

Consider other therapies (spinal cord
stimulation, external counterpulsation?

I

*Patients with moderate to high probability of coronary artery disease.

