Status epilepticus is generally defined as 30 minutes of either continuous seizure activity or repetitive seizures without recovery. Convulsive status epilepticus is a medical emergency. Delay in treatment may result in difficult seizure control and poor outcome. Given these risks, aggressive therapy is appropriate for any convulsion lasting >5 minutes. After a convulsion has ended, the patient should be carefully assessed for the possibility of nonconvulsive or subtle ongoing seizures.

A. Types of simple partial status epilepticus include somatomotor (including epilepsy partialis continua), somatosensory, aphasic, visual, oculoclonic, and affective. The electroencephalogram (EEG) shows focal or lateralized discharges. Treatment is with benzodiazepines, phenobarbital, phenytoin, valproate, carbam-azepine, and the newer antiepileptic drugs (AEDs).
B. Complex partial status epilepticus (CPSE) consists of complex partial seizures that alternate with a postictal state and may eventually evolve into a continuous epileptic state. It often occurs in patients with known partial epilepsy. Diagnosis may require EEG monitoring. The EEG shows rhythmic activity beginning focally and spreading bilaterally. Treatment is similar to that of simple partial status epilepticus. The use of more aggressive treatment is controversial and should be individualized.
C. Absence status epilepticus is also referred to as petit mal status epilepticus or spike-wave stupor. Clinically, there is a variable degree of responsiveness from slowing of ideation and confusion to lethargy. There is no cycle between levels of responsiveness and unresponsiveness as in CPSE. It is usually seen in children with absence epilepsy but can also be seen in adults, particularly with benzodiazepine withdrawal or use of specific AEDs such as tiagabine. The EEG shows generalized spike-wave discharges. Traditional treatment consists of IV benzodiazepines, valproate, or ethosuximide. The newer broad-spectrum AEDs may also be helpful.
D. True myoclonic status epilepticus is rare and limited to children and adolescents. In adults, myoclonic movements associated with an EEG showing periodic discharges on an attenuated background (burst-suppression pattern) can be seen following an anoxic-ischemic event and portends a bad prognosis. It can also be seen following prolonged convulsive seizures and may indicate a need for more aggressive treatment.
E. Convulsive status epilepticus is the most common and the most dangerous form of status epilepticus. The initial evaluation consists of assessing the airway and assessing and monitoring cardiorespiratory status, providing oxygen and suctioning, obtaining IV access, and sending blood for laboratory tests. Thiamine and glucose are administered unless the patient has a documented normal glucose level. A focused history and neurologic examination are performed, assessing for a known seizure disorder or other illnesses, trauma, focal neurologic signs, and signs of medical illness (e.g., infection, substance abuse).
F. Administer a benzodiazepine as a first-line therapeutic agent. Lorazepam is the preferred agent because of a longer duration of antiseizure action and is given up to 0.1 mg/kg at 1-2 mg/min. Diazepam can also be used at up to 0.25 mg/kg at 2-4 mg/min or midazolam 0.2 mg/kg at 1-4 mg/min.
G. Phenytoin (or fosphenytoin) is administered immediately following lorazepam. It is given at 20 mg/kg (<50 mg/min). The fosphenytoin dose is 20 mg phenytoin equivalents (PE)/kg (<150 mg/min). An additional 10 mg/kg can be administered if seizures continue. Phenytoin is associated with risk of hypotension and bradycardia. These side effects are less frequently seen with fosphenytoin, but the increased cost of fosphenytoin limits its availability. Other agents that may be used instead of phenytoin, or may follow phenytoin infusion if seizures continue, include IV valproate at 20–30 mg/kg (200 mg/min) or phenobarbital 10-20 mg/kg (100 mg/min). Phenobarbital is also associated with a risk of hypotension. Once the patient is stabilized, further diagnostic workup may include CT, lumbar puncture (LP), EEG, and MRI. Immediate EEG assessment is required if there is use of a long-acting paralytic agent, when there is no improvement or return to baseline mental status after controlling overt convulsive movements, or in cases of refractory status epilepticus.
H. If seizures persist despite therapy with benzodiazepines and a second AED, status epilepticus is considered refractory and will likely require drug-induced coma with intubation, intensive care unit (ICU) admission, and continuous EEG monitoring. Medication is titrated to induce a burst-suppression pattern on EEG or suppression of epileptiform activity. Medication-induced hypotension is to be expected and can be treated by slowing or stopping the infusion, giving fluid boluses, and using vasopressors as necessary. Historically, pentobarbital has been the agent most widely used. More recently midazolam and propofol have been used with success. These agents are thought to exert their antiseizure action by increased GABAergic activity. Pentobarbital has a higher lipid solubility than phenobarbital, allowing a more rapid passage through the blood-brain barrier, and has a longer half-life than either midazolam or propofol. It is bolused at 5–20 mg/kg and infused at a rate of 0.5–5.0 mg/kg/hr. For breakthrough seizures, another bolus should be administered and the drip should be increased by 0.5 to 3.0 mg/kg/hr. Propofol is increasingly being used as an alternative to pentobarbital and has a rapid onset and the shortest half-life, allowing for the ability to periodically monitor the neurologic examination. It is bolused at 1-3 mg/kg and infused at a rate of 2–10 mg/kg/hr. Higher infusion rates are associated with more adverse reactions. Midazolam has a very rapid onset of action, but tachyphylaxis can often occur. It is bolused at 0.15–0.2 mg/kg and infused at a rate of 0.02 mg/kg/hr.
I. With failure to respond to the previous treatments, status epilepticus is considered severely refractory with a high risk of mortality. Further treatment options include ketamine, lidocaine, thiopental, and isoflurane. Paraldehyde may also be helpful, but availability is limited. Other AEDs via a nasogastric tube, such as topiramate and levetiracetam, can be tried as well.