STRIDOR

Stridor, an audible high-pitched sound with respiration, is
a common but serious symptom that requires immediate
medical evaluation. It occurs when air is forced through
a narrowed airway lumen. In general, narrowing superior
to the vocal cords leads to inspiratory stridor, whereas
narrowing below the vocal cords produces either expiratory or mixed stridor. Although much attention has been
focused on the phase of stridor, the onset of symptoms
also provides a useful approach to the management and
differential diagnosis.
A. Patients who present with stridor should be triaged as
having acute or chronic disease. The clinician should
assess whether the symptoms occur with inspiration,
expiration, or both and perform a focused history and
physical examination. In patients who are stable, imaging can help characterize the airway lesion. The most
important initial element of management is ensuring
that the patient maintain a safe and patent airway.
B. Acute upper airway obstruction resulting in stridor
classically presents with the sudden onset of dyspnea
and respiratory distress. These patients should be
brought immediately to the emergency department.
Because of concern for impending airway closure,
treatment for presumed anaphylaxis and laryngeal
edema with epinephrine is appropriate in patients
with acute stridor.
C. Laryngeal edema most often presents in cases of anaphylaxis or inhalational injuries. In anaphylaxis, a history of
exposure to a known offending agent should be sought.
Examination should include evaluation for swelling of
the lips, tongue, or eyes and an urticarial rash. Rarely,
patients will give a history of a hereditary form of angioedema from C1 esterase gene mutations. Thermal injury
after smoke inhalation can cause delayed onset of airway
edema, and patients require close ongoing monitoring
for signs of distress.
D. Infection is another common cause of acute stridor.
Although epiglottitis is the most concerning potential
infection, the clinician should also consider bacterial
tracheitis and retropharyngeal or peritonsillar abscess.
Before widespread flu immunization, epiglottitis was a
disease of childhood, but it is now increasingly recognized in adults. Adults present with fever, neck pain, and
odynophagia and, as a late finding, stridor. If the stridor
is subacute, lateral radiographs of the neck may be

480

E.

F.

G.

H.

obtained and classically reveal swelling of the epiglottis
(the so-called thumb sign), uvula, and prevertebral soft
tissues. Epiglottitis can be a life-threatening condition
requiring urgent tracheotomy in as many as 15% of
adults; some series report a mortality rate as high
as 7%.
Foreign body aspiration, although typically seen in
children, can also occur in adults as a result of accidental inhalation or bulbar dysfunction as in amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis (ALS), Parkinson’s disease, or other
neurologic diseases.
In the event of respiratory decompensation in the setting
of acute stridor, a fiberoptic intubation in the hands of
the most experienced operator is preferred, with backup
in place for a surgical tracheotomy.
The clinician should consider a unique differential diagnosis for patients who present with subacute or chronic
stridor. The first concern is for structural abnormalities
in the upper airway resulting from neoplasms, benign
cysts, or goiter. Additionally, tracheal stenosis can be
seen resulting from protracted intubation with balloon
cuff injury or in cases of severe gastroesophageal reflux
disease (GERD). Vocal cord dysfunction with involuntary adduction of the cords will also produce intermittent stridor. More rarely, rheumatoid arthritis results in
cricoarytenoid disease and subsequent stridor.
As part of the initial workup, flow-volume loops obtained
by spirometry can suggest whether there is a fixed or
variable obstruction and whether the obstruction is intrathoracic or extrathoracic in location. Most clinicians
obtain a chest radiograph, although a CT scan with reconstructions of the airway highlights the nature and
extent of the lesion more completely. Direct visualization
with laryngoscopy in the hands of an otolaryngologist, or
bronchoscopy by a pulmonologist, remains the gold standard and also allows for potential intervention.

References
Cordle R. Upper respiratory emergencies. In Tintinalli JE, Kelen GD,
Stapczynski JS, et al, eds. Tintinalli’s Emergency Medicine: A Comprehensive Study Guide, 6th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2004:848–857.
Tierney LM Jr, McPhee SJ, Papadakis MA, eds; Gonzales R, Zeiger R, online
eds., Current Medical Diagnosis and Treatment: Ear, Nose, and Throat:
Dysphonia, Hoarseness, and Stridor. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2006.
Upper airway obstruction. In Fraser RS, Müller NL, Colman N, et al.,
Fraser and Pare’s Diagnosis of Diseases of the Chest. Philadelphia:
Elsevier, 1999:2021–2053.

481
Patient with STRIDOR

A Initial history and physical examination

B Acute stridor

G Chronic stridor

Treat with epinephrine

Consider potential
etiologies

Assess for need of
emergent airway

Yes

F Fiberoptic intubation
or tracheotomy

No

Physiologic

Structural

Vocal cord dysfunction

Neoplasm
Tracheal stenosis
Goiter
Rheumatoid arthritis

Determine etiology

H Chest x-ray film

CT scan with reformatting
Flow-volume loops

D Infectious
Consider:
Epiglottitis
Tracheitis
Abscess

Deliver specific
therapy

If subacute
consider lateral
neck films

Noninfectious

C Laryngeal edema
Laryngospasm

E Foreign body

Laryngoscopy
and/or bronchoscopy

Deliver specific therapy
Treatment for
anaphylaxis or
inhalational injury

Removal with rigid
bronchoscopy

