STROKE TREATMENT AND PROPHYLAXIS

A. In patients with stroke or transient ischemic attack
(TIA) who are candidates for anticoagulation, it is
important to evaluate any evidence of cerebral hemorrhage to triage the possibility of thrombolysis or
anticoagulation. The timing of the presentation of
stroke is crucial for acute stroke therapy (see Acute
Stroke chapter).
B. Beyond the acute phase, management of stroke and
TIA centers around secondary prophylaxis. This management includes modification of risk factors such as
hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hypercholesterolemia,
smoking, and obesity. Myocardial infarction (MI) is
one of the most common causes of death in patients
with TIA; therefore, a thorough cardiac history and
evaluation are indicated.
C. Antiplatelet agents (aspirin, aspirin plus dipyridamole,
or clopidogrel) are the treatment of choice for
noncardioembolic TIA or stroke of atherothrombotic,
lacunar, or cryptogenic etiology. Anticoagulant therapy
(warfarin, bridged by low molecular weight heparin or
IV heparin) is the mainstay medical therapy for the
management of stroke related to atrial fibrillation.
Consider anticoagulation also for patients with a thrombus, mechanical prosthetic valve, or carotid/vertebral
dissection. However, because of the hemorrhagic risks,
anticoagulation is a relative contraindication for embolic stroke from endocarditis. Clinical suspicion of
endocarditis would warrant the withholding of anticoagulation therapy.
D. For noncardioembolic stroke, the 2004 American
College of Chest Physicians (ACCP) guidelines suggest use of either aspirin-dipyridamole or clopidogrel
over aspirin, if there is no added financial strain to the
patient. The risk of agranulocytosis makes ticlopidine a

418

second-line antiplatelet agent for those who do not
tolerate first-line agents. CBC must be checked every
2 weeks for the first 3 months.
E. Management of carotid artery TIAs involves the determination of the degree of carotid stenosis. If there is an
ipsilateral stenosis of !70%, carotid endarterectomy
along with best medical treatment (antiplatelet agent
or anticoagulation) is more beneficial than medical
therapy alone. Stent placement or angioplasty are still
under investigation but may offer a better risk/benefit
profile in selected higher-risk patient populations.

References
Adams HP Jr, Brott TG, Furlan AJ, et al. Guidelines of thrombolytic
therapy for acute stroke: a supplement to the guidelines for the management of patients with acute ischemic stroke. A statement for
healthcare professionals from a Special Writing Group of the Stroke
Council, American Heart Association. Stroke 1996;27:1711.
Hacke W, Albers G, Al-Rawi Y, et al. The Desmoteplase in Acute Ischemic Stroke Trial (DIAS): a phase II MRI-based 9-hour window acute
stroke thrombolysis trial with intravenous desmoteplase. Stroke
2005;36:66.
Hacke W, Donnan G, Fieschi C, et al. Association of outcome with early
stroke treatment: pooled analysis of ATLANTIS, ECASS, and NINDS
rt-PA stroke trials. Lancet 2004;363:768.
Furlan A, Higashida R, Wechsler L, et al. Intra-arterial prourokinase for
acute ischemic stroke. The PROACT II study: a randomized controlled trial. Prolyse in Acute Cerebral Thromboembolism. JAMA
1999;282:2003.
Kase CS, Furlan AJ, Wechsler LR, et al. Cerebral hemorrhage after intraarterial thrombolysis for ischemic stroke: the PROACT II trial.
Neurology 2001;57:1603.
Smith WS, Sung G, Starkman S, et al. Safety and efficacy of mechanical
embolectomy in acute ischemic stroke: results of the MERCI trial.
Stroke 2005;36:1432.
Tissue plasminogen activator for acute ischemic stroke. The National
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke rt-PA Stroke Study
Group. N Engl J Med 1995;333:1581.

419
Patient for STROKE EVALUATION

A Acute

(see Acute Stroke)

A Chronic

(see Transient Ischemic
Attack and Stroke)

B Evaluate risk factors for secondary prevention:
Hypertension
Diabetes
Cholesterol
Smoking
Obesity
Cardiovascular

C Antiplatelet vs. anticoagulation therapy

Noncardiogenic etiology
(atherothrombotic, lacunar,
cryptogenic)

Etiology related to atrial
fibrillation or other cardiogenic
source (except endocarditis)

Consider:
Antiplatelet agents

Consider:
Anticoagulation

D See ACCP 2004 guidelines for

assistance with choice of antiplatelet
agents (aspirin plus dipyridamole
or clopidogrel)

E Evaluate and manage carotid or
other extracranial or intracranial
vascular etiology

If "70% stenosis,
consider surgical or
endovascular treatment

