SUBMERSION

Drowning is death from suffocation as a result of submersion in a fluid, whereas near-drowning implies survival,
at least temporarily, after such suffocation. In the United
States, drowning accounts for approximately 5000 deaths,
!10,000 hospital admissions, and ! 30,000 emergency department (ED) visits per year. Drowning is typically in the
top-five causes of traumatic death for all age groups and
is a leading cause of death for children and adolescents.
The backyard swimming pool is the most common cause of
drowning for those " 5 years, and the bathtub is the most
common household cause of drowning.
Submersion is usually accompanied by panic and breath
holding. After a short period, patients will develop severe
air hunger and some degree of hypoxia and hypercarbia,
resulting in an involuntary gasp causing aspiration. This is
usually followed by laryngospasm, more aspiration, and
death. Of victims, 10%–15% succumb to asphyxia while
submerged without evidence of aspiration, probably because of laryngospasm.
Morbidity and mortality are multifactorial and a consequence of the duration of submersion, the temperature of
the water, the age and comorbidities of the victim, and the
salinity and contamination of the water. Patients who are
awake and conscious or have minimal alteration of consciousness on arrival have very good outcomes. The degree
of neurologic impairment at presentation directly correlates
to outcome.
A. Some victims of near-drowning do not aspirate water,
have limited laryngospasm or breath holding, and regain
effective ventilation before permanent damage occurs.
These patients may appear sleepy or groggy or completely alert. Despite appearing stable, these patients
may be severely hypoxic or become so quickly. Cervical
spine (C-spine) precautions should be continued if neck
injury is possible, and these patients should be transported with supplemental O2 to the nearest ED.

650

B. The fundamental goal for initial resuscitation of
the apneic near-drowning victim is to restore Pao2 to
normal as rapidly as possible. The victim should be
extricated from the water as quickly as possible. If the
victim is apneic and mouth-to-mouth ventilation in
the water is possible, this should be initiated when the
rescuer reaches the victim. Because chest compressions are not typically feasible in the water, they
should be initiated when the victim can be removed.
C-spine precaution should be followed during extrication if a fall or diving injury is suspected. The single
most important factor related to a normal recovery is
the prevention of irreversible hypoxia. This usually
means that the first responder must know cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) and be able to use it when
necessary.
C. If the patient who is initially apneic has a palpable
pulse, the rescuer should continue providing assisted
ventilation and activate the emergency medical system by asking another person to call 911 (or other
local emergency number). The rescuer should continue assessing the victim’s airway to ensure its patency. If necessary, the rescuer may use a Heimlich
maneuver to clear the airway (with the awareness
that gastric contents may be aspirated during this
maneuver). The Heimlich maneuver should not be
used in an attempt to empty the stomach. The patient who is apneic should be intubated by paramedic
personnel as soon as possible and transported to the
nearest ED.
D. The patient who is apneic and pulseless should receive CPR according to American Cardiac Life Support (ACLS) guidelines while C-spine precautions
are maintained. The rescuer should have a bystander
call 911. The patient should be intubated by paramedic personnel as soon as possible and transported
with CPR and ACLS in progress to the nearest ED.
(Continued on page 652)

651
Victim of SUBMERSION

Spontaneous ventilation
(awake and alert)?

No

Yes

A Remove from water

Apnea

Determine core temperature
C-spine immobilization
ECG

B Remove from water

Initiate CPR
C-spine immobilization

C Apnea with pulse
Assist ventilation
Clear airway, if necessary
Call 911
Intubate and transport

Admit patient
to ED

Cont’d on p 653

D Apnea without pulse
Continue CPR
Clear airway, if necessary
Call 911
Intubate and transport

652
E. In the ED the patient who is alert yet hypoxic should
be treated aggressively. If the patient is alert or able to
be aroused, the physician may try to use a mask for
continuous positive alveolar pressure (CPAP) first. If
CPAP is not readily available or cannot be implemented because of altered consciousness, the patient
should be intubated. The patient’s oxygenation may
then be augmented with positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP). All intubated patients should have a
gastric tube placed to decompress the stomach. Patients with altered consciousness should not have
stomach decompression until intubation has been
confirmed; those with normal consciousness typically
do not need decompression. If present, treat hypothermia, bronchospasm, and acidosis. Admit these patients
to the intensive care unit (ICU). If the near-drowning
patient presents with shock, consider alternative causes
of shock, such as major associated trauma, stroke,
acute myocardial infarction, diabetes, and the like.
F. The near-drowning patient who is spontaneously breathing is extremely fortunate and will have a normal Pao2,
Paco2, and pH. Check the C-spine for injuries. If the
patient is normothermic and exhibits no other abnormalities, including bronchospasm or altered consciousness, he or she may be released to a strong social support system with strict precautionary advice. Treat the
patient who is nonhypoxic and hypothermic for hypothermia (see I). Admit patients exhibiting bronchospasm
or acidosis for observation. All pediatric patients should
have a social services evaluation to determine whether
child abuse or lack of supervision was a factor in the
drowning.
G. The initially apneic patient with an intact circulation
will likely be hypoxic on arrival at the ED. If not yet
intubated by prehospital personnel, intubate the patient on arrival. Occasionally, patients begin breathing
spontaneously during the initial prehospital resuscitation and present without hypoxia. In this situation, they
should be treated as in F. Intubated hypoxic patients
benefit from PEEP. This can dramatically improve the
ventilation/perfusion mismatch. Place an orogastric
(OG) tube to aspirate gastric contents. If present, treat
bronchospasm and acidosis (inhaled #2-adrenergic agonists and sodium bicarbonate). Examine the patient
for C-spine injuries, and obtain chest film. Treat hypothermia (see I). Admit these patients to the ICU.
H. The apneic and pulseless patient who arrives without
previous intubation should be intubated on arrival.
CPR and ACLS should be continued.
I. In the patient with hypothermia, continue CPR
until the core temperature is !32° C. In the severely
hypothermic patient (core temperature "32° C),

implement active core rewarming to prevent the
phenomena of “afterdrop,” which can occur when
active external rewarming (e.g., warm immersion)
used alone leads to reperfusion of cold peripheral
tissues and subsequent cooling of the previously
sequestered warm-core blood. Active core rewarming
can include heated humidified O2, heated peritoneal
lavage, and cardiopulmonary bypass. Other methods
include gastric and colonic irrigation, thoracostomy
with pleural and mediastinal irrigation, and hemodialysis. Each of these techniques carries inherent risks
and complications. Truncal active external rewarming may be added to augment core rewarming. For
the patient with mild to moderate hypothermia (core
temperature 32°–37° C), passive external rewarming
is appropriate. This includes the removal of wet
clothing and prevention of further heat loss by applying blankets. The efficacy of ACLS medications is
controversial in hypothermia. Bretylium has been
reported to be effective in ventricular fibrillation.
The efficacy of atropine in hypothermia-induced
bradycardia is doubtful. The combination of hypoxia
and hypothermia can lead to a marked decrease in
tissue O2 delivery. Although hypothermia may be
protective via diminished metabolic rate, it is more
often lethal.
J. In the ICU, ventilatory management should be aggressive, including PEEP, frequent suctioning, and frequent monitoring of the ventilation/perfusion shunt.
Acidosis and cardiac arrhythmias should also be treated
aggressively. Although controversial, consider intracranial pressure (ICP) monitoring, pulmonary artery
pressure monitoring, and barbiturate coma. These
treatments contain risks and have questionable benefit.
Ensure that no C-spine injury exists (if this is not
already done). Treat hypothermia (see I). Treat bronchospasm and acidosis if present. Monitor electrolytes
and fluid status closely. Steroids, barbiturates, and
induced hypothermia have not been shown to improve
survival. Address psychosocial issues with the family.

References
Feldhous KM. Submersion. In Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al,
eds. Rosen’s Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice,
5th ed. St. Louis: Mosby, 2002:2050.
Kallas HJ. Drowning and near-drowning. In Behrman RE. Nelson
Textbook of Pediatrics, 17th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2004:321.
Olshaker JS. Submersion. Emerg Med Clin North Am 2004;22(2):
357–367, viii.
Zuckerbraun NS, Saladino RA. Pediat drowning: current management
strategies for immediate care. Clin Pediatr Emerg Med 2005;6(1).

653
Victim of SUBMERSION
(Cont’d from p 651)
Admit patient to ED

Spontaneous ventilation

H Apnea without pulse

Apnea with pulse

Intubate, if not done
Continue CPR, ACLS
Rewarm if hypothermic
C-spine series and chest film

E Hypoxia

G Hypoxia

F Normal PaO2

Conscious

Comatose

CPAP mask or
intubate
Nasogastric tube

Intubate
PEEP
Nasogastric tube
Suction airway

Observe and
reassess
C-spine series
and chest film

Normothermia

Discharge home
only if patient
has been
asymptomatic
from scene
through transport
and ED

J In ICU:

Intubate
Orogastric tube
C-spine series
and chest film

I Hypothermia

Normothermia

32°–37° C

"32° C

Passive external
rewarming
Continue ACLS
Treat:
Acidosis
Bronchospasm

Active core
rewarming
ACLS until
temperature
!32° C
Treat:
Acidosis
Bronchospasm

Monitor PaO2, ECG, ventilation-perfusion
shunt
Consider monitoring cardiac output, ICP
Treat hypoxia, arrhythmias, bronchospasm,
acidosis, hypothermia, electrolyte
disturbances
Obtain C-spine series if not yet done

Continue ACLS
Treat:
Acidosis
Bronchospasm

