SUDDEN CARDIAC DEATH


In the United States the total number of sudden cardiac
death cases is estimated to exceed 300,000 annually. In
the developing countries cardiovascular disease is the
most common cause of natural death, with 50% of deaths
occurring suddenly. Coronary artery disease is the most
commonly documented etiology of events. Causative lesions have been demonstrated posthumously in up to 90% of
victims of sudden cardiac death. Sudden cardiac death is
the initial and only presentation in 20% of deaths related
to coronary disease.
Other causes of sudden cardiac death include
idiopathic-dilated cardiomyopathy, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, left ventricular hypertrophy, long QT
syndrome (congenital or acquired), arrhythmogenic right
ventricular cardiomyopathy, Brugada syndrome, myocarditis, and congenital coronary artery anomalies. Nonarrhythmic and noncardiac causes simulating sudden
cardiac death include rupture of aortic aneurysm, intracerebral hemorrhage, pulmonary embolism (PE), and
prosthetic valve dysfunction.
The care of the patient successfully resuscitated after
cardiac arrest should focus on timely evaluation for coronary artery disease with cardiac catheterization if there
are no neurologic contraindications. ECG, echocardiography, and family history are essential adjuncts. Recognition
of familial syndromes is essential, not only for the presenting patient, but also for screening of extended family.
Survivors of sudden cardiac death should receive implantable defibrillator therapy for secondary prevention if no
clear reversible cause is found, and selected patients with
correctible ischemia should also receive implants for protection against future events.
The documented initial rhythm in sudden cardiac death
is dependent on the time elapsed between the collapse and
the first electrocardiographic recording. In a study that included patients wearing Holter monitors at the time of an
arrest, the initial rhythm was ventricular fibrillation (VF) or

92

ventricular tachycardia (VT) in 83% of cases, whereas
bradyarrhythmias occurred in the remaining 17%. In another study, in which the time to evaluation was !4 minutes, VF was present in 95% of patients, with asystole in 5%.
When the time to resuscitation was 12–15 minutes, VF was
recorded in 71% and asystole in 21%.
Survival to hospital discharge following resuscitated sudden cardiac death is highly dependent on the initially documented rhythm. Survivor rates are highest for VT, with two
thirds of patients surviving, followed closely by VF, but rates
are close to zero when the presenting scenario is asystole or
electromechanical dissociation. Thus a patient’s chance of
surviving cardiac arrest is related both to the presenting arrhythmia and to the time elapsed from the collapse to the
initiation of resuscitation. For each minute of continued VF,
the odds of survival decrease by 7%–10%.
Other factors that influence the likelihood of survival
include the time of initiation of CPR and the time of initiation of Advanced Cardiac Life Support (ACLS) by
trained personnel with defibrillation combined with drug
therapy. Thus the Emergency Cardiovascular Care (ECC)
guidelines published by the American Heart Association
(AHA) stress the “chain of survival” concept to maximize
the likelihood of successful resuscitation:
1. Early access: A bystander recognizes an arrest and
alerts EMS
2. Early CPR: Initiation of effective CPR by a bystander
3. Early defibrillation: Ideally delivered within 1–2 minutes
of VF onset to restore a perfusing rhythm by the emergency medical services (EMS) team or a bystander with
an automated external defibrillator (AED)
4. Early ACLS: Trained personnel (physician in emergency department or in an ambulance or a paramedic)
providing defibrillation, intubation, IV fluids, and antiarrhythmic medications

93
To maximize the likelihood of survival of a patient with
sudden cardiac death, AHA promotes the awareness of
cardiovascular health and provides the unified Basic Life
Support (BLS) training protocols for the general public.
Paramedics and medical personnel are further trained
in ACLS delivery protocols adopted throughout North
America. A summary of the AHA Emergency Cardiac
Care algorithm follows. It is not intended as a replacement
for the comprehensive ACLS training course, nor is it
meant to replace the need for refresher courses. Our intention is to provide a quick memory guide for those already familiar with ACLS skills.
The algorithm illustrates the sequence that is appropriate in most instances of a cardiac arrest and is organized
around the steps of the primary and secondary survey. Appropriate actions, ongoing information gathering, consideration of the possible underlying causes, and teamwork
are key to the successful outcome of the resuscitation
process.

References
1. American Heart Association Guidelines for Cardiopulmonary
Resuscitation and Emergency Cardiovascular Care. Circulation
2005;24(Suppl I).
2. Cummins RO, Ornato JP, Thies WH, Pepe PE. Improving survival
from sudden cardiac arrest: the “chain of survival” concept. A statement
for health professionals from the Advanced Cardiac Life Support Subcommittee and the Emergency Cardiac Care Committee, American
Heart Association. Circulation 1991;83(5):1832–1847.
3. de Luna AB, Coumel P, Leclercq JF. Ambulatory sudden cardiac
death: mechanisms of production of fatal arrhythmias on the basis of
data from 157 cases. Am Heart J 1989;117:151–159.
4. Deshpende SS, Akhtar M. Sudden cardiac death. In Topol EJ
(ed). Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine. 2nd ed. Philadelphia:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2002.
5. Hallstrom AP, Eisenberg MS, Bergner L. The persistence of ventricular
fibrillation and its implication for evaluating EMS. Emerg Health Serv
Q 1983;1:42–47.
6. Mehta D, Curwin J, Gomesw A, Fuster V. Sudden death in coronary
artery disease: acute ischemia versus myocardial substrate. Circulation
1997;96:3215–3223.
7. Myerburg R, Kessler KM, Castellanos A. Sudden cardiac death: epidemiology, transient risk, and intervention assessment. Ann Intern
Med 1993;119:1187–1197.
8. Schatzkin A, Cupples LA, Heeren T, et al. Sudden death in the Framingham Heart Study. Differences in incidence and risk factors by sex
and coronary disease status. Am J Epidemiol 1984;120:888–899.
9. Weaver WD, Hill D, Fahrenbruch CD, et al. Use of the automatic
external defibrillator in the management of out-of-hospital cardiac
arrest. N Engl J Med 1988;319:661–666.
10. Weaver WD, Cobb LA, Hallstrom AP, et al. Factors influencing
survival after out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. J Am Coll Cardiol
1986;7:754.
11. Wyse DG, Friedman PL, Brodsky MA, et al. Life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias due to transient or correctable causes: high risk
for death in follow up. J Am Coll Cardiol 2001;38(6):1718–1724.
12. Zheng ZJ, Croft JB, Giles WH, Mensah GA. Sudden cardiac death in
the United States, 1989 to 1998. Circulation 2001;104:2158–2163.

94
1. Whether witnessing a collapse or being called to an
unwitnessed event, assess the environment to allow
delivery of care without putting the rescuers at risk.
Assess (ask about) the circumstances to help narrow
down the diagnostic possibilities. For example, a
preceding chest pain versus an interrupted meal may
point toward a cardiac or respiratory cause. Establish
responsiveness by talking or shouting to the victim.
On verification of unresponsiveness, call for help.
2. Activate EMS (911), call the code, and request bystander
and/or paramedical/medical assistance. Request an AED
or a code cart with a defibrillator, airway support equipment, and ACLS drugs. Begin the Primary Survey. Open/
clear the airway, and “look, listen, feel” for spontaneous
respirations.
3. Use one-way valve ventilation barrier device or
bag-mask device and oropharyngeal airway if available,
assess, and manage airway obstruction. Check carotid
artery for pulse 5–10 seconds.
4. Full cardiac arrest confirmed, initiate adequate chest
compressions and continue artificial respirations. Attach
AED/defibrillator. Take charge or ask a more experienced rescuer; delegate tasks to bystanders/code team
members.
5. Continue chest compressions, and monitor adequacy
(carotid pulse). Assess rhythm.
6. If VF or pulseless VT.
7. Deliver three direct current (DC) shocks as needed
(200 J, 300 J, 360 J—monophasic or equivalent biphasic). After three shocks, check pulse; if absent, resume
CPR. Initiate secondary survey.
8. If asystole, recheck electrodes. Consider duration of
the arrest and termination of efforts. If pulseless electrical activity (PEA), DO NOT SHOCK! Ascertain
pulselessness versus low output state and consider
typical causes of shock (differential diagnosis).

9. Consider transcutaneous pacing early, especially in a
witnessed arrest. Monitor rhythm by differentiating
pacing spikes from true QRS complexes. Monitor
pulse by differentiating true pulse (carotid) from
skeletal muscle twitches induced by electric current that may be observed in upper extremities.
10. Secondary survey and continuation of rescue protocol will generally require paramedical/medical
(ACLS-trained) personnel. Delegate or assume
predefined roles within the team. Intubate, confirm, and secure endotracheal tube placement and
adequacy of ventilations (auscultation, pulse oximetry, end-tidal CO2). Secure IV access. Monitor
vital signs. If pulse is palpable, monitor blood pressure (BP). Administer adrenergic agents. Consider
rhythm-appropriate antiarrhythmic medications:
a. Amiodarone 300 mg IV push for persistent
VF/VT; additional 150 mg IV for recurrent VF/VT.
Maximum dose 2.2 g in 24 hr.
b. Lidocaine 1–1.5 mg/kg IV push for persistent or
recurrent VF/VT; may repeat in 3–5 minutes,
maximum dose 3 mg/kg.
c. Magnesium sulfate 1–2 g IV in torsades de pointes
or if hypomagnesemia suspected.
d. Procainamide up to 50 mg/min IV, maximum
dose 17 mg/kg for recurrent VF/VT.
Consider sodium bicarbonate 1 mEq/kg IV in known,
preexisting hyperkalemia, acidosis, or tricyclic or aspirin
overdose, after a long arrest interval.
11. Search for and treat reversible metabolic causes.
Consider/memorize the list of typical causes of PEA
and asystole.

95
Patient with SUDDEN CARDIAC DEATH

1

Witnessed/unwitnessed collapse
Possible arrest
Assess responsiveness
Unresponsive

A

Activate emergency response
Call for assistance/defibrillator
Begin primary ABCD survey
Assess/secure airway

2

Not breathing

B
C

3

Two slow breaths
(pocket face mask)
Assess pulse
No pulse

C
D

Start chest compressions
Attach monitor/defibrillator

Continue CPR
Assess rhythm

4

5

6 VF/VT

7 1 shock

CPR
2 min

D

8 Asystole
Secondary ABCD survey 10
A–Airway: airway device, intubation
B–Breathing: check ventilation, oxygenation
C–Circulation: IV access, adrenergic agents
VF/VT: Vasopressin 40 units IV–one dose
Epinephrine 1 mg IV q3–5min
Non-VF/VT: Epinephrine 1 mg IV q3–5min
Atropine 1 mg IV q3–5min up to
0.04 mg/kg (in PEA, only if slow)
C–Circulation: Consider antiarrhythmics,
buffer agents

or PEA

9 Consider

pacing in
asystole
CPR
3 min

Differential diagnosis: search and treat reversible causes 11
Hypovolemia
Tablets: overdose, medication error
Hypoxia
Tamponade
Hydrogen ion: acidosis
Tension pneumothorax
Hyperkalemia/hypokalemia Thrombosis: coronary (ACS)
Hypothermia
Thrombosis: pulmonary (PE)

