SUICIDAL PATIENT

Most people who are suicidal communicate their selfdestructive intentions to those around them, including
their physicians. As many as two thirds of those who commit
suicide have seen a doctor in the weeks to months before
their death. Medical students and primary care physicians
should therefore know how to evaluate the patient who is
suicidal. Does a patient look or feel depressed and talk of
“not being able to go on,” giving up, and losing interest in
activities? If so, a more detailed assessment of suicidal risk
is in order. Factors to consider in a comprehensive suicide
risk assessment include age, gender, social and cultural
issues, psychiatric diagnosis, prevention strategies, treatment setting, and type of treatment.
A. Psychiatric disorders associated with an increased risk
of suicidal ideation and attempt include depression,
bipolar disorder, alcohol or drug abuse, panic attacks,
and panic disorders. Factors associated with high acute
suicide risk in patients with affective disorders include
an agitated state and severe manifestations of anxiety,
panic attacks, global insomnia, and anhedonia.
B. The following psychosocial factors place people at an
increased risk of committing suicide: single, divorced,
widowed, or separated marital status; unemployment;
decreased social supports; humiliating life events
(e.g., the recent loss of a job or an important relationship); a chronic medical illness; or a family history
of suicide. A previous suicide attempt is a predictor of
future completed suicide.
C. Do not ignore or minimize references to suicide, such
as taking risks, talking of guilt over past events, talking
of “ending it all,” making a will, or giving away prized
possessions. Ask patients directly whether they are
suicidal and if so what plan they have; assess their
understanding of the lethality of the plan. Do they
have the means to carry out the plan? Have there been
earlier attempts? Determine patients’ mood, changes
in appetite and sleep, the presence of hallucinations

682

or delusions, and quality of speech. Patients with
“command” hallucinations to commit suicide are at
particularly high risk. A physical examination and laboratory studies to consider contributory or concomitant
physical illness are necessary.
D. If the patient has serious immediate suicidal intent,
consider psychiatric consultation and voluntary or
involuntary hospitalization. If the risk is not as imminent, establish and make available a therapeutic relationship. Forming a no-suicide contract, scheduling
frequent appointments, and providing reassurance
and hope for the future are important. Allow the patient to ventilate feelings and help him or her problem
solve, communicating empathy and caring. Treat any
underlying psychiatric or medical disorder.

References
Blumenthal SJ. Suicide: a guide to risk factors, assessment, and treatment
of suicidal patients. Med Clin North Am 1988;72:937.
Busch KA, Fawcett J, Jacobs DG. Clinical correlates of inpatient suicide.
J Clin Psychiatry 2003;64:14–19.
Fawcett J, Clark DC, Busch KA. Assessing and treating the patient at risk
for suicide. Psychiatr Annals 1993;23:244.
Fawcett J, Sheftner WA, Fogg L, et al. Time-related predictors of suicide
in major affective disorder. Am J Psychiatry 1990;146:1189.
Hall RC, Platt DE, Hall RC. Suicide risk assessment: a review of risk
factors in 100 patients who made severe suicide attempts: evaluation
of suicide risk in a time of managed care. Psychosomatics 1999;40:18.
Hirschfeld JM, Russell JM. Assessment and treatment of suicidal
patients. N Engl J Med 1997;337:910.
Malone KM, Szanto K, Corbitt EM, et al. Clinical assessment versus
research methods in the assessment of suicidal behavior. Am J
Psychiatry 1995;152:1601.
Roy A. Suicide. In Kaplan HI, Sadock BJ, eds. Comprehensive Textbook
of Psychiatry, 6th ed. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1995.
Simon RI. Suicide risk: assessing the unpredictable. In Simon RI, Hales RE.
The American Psychiatric Publishing Textbook of Suicide Assessment
and Management. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing,
2006.
Weissman MM, Kierman GL, Markowitz JS, et al. Suicidal ideation and
suicide attempts in panic disorder and attacks. N Engl J Med
1989;321:1209.

683
SUICIDAL PATIENT

A Assess presence

of a psychiatric disorder

B Assess presence of

psychosocial factors that
place patient at increased
risk of suicide

C Evaluate suicidal ideation
and mental status

D Trusting therapeutic

relationship established

Patient able to
control behavior
and not act on
impulse
Assess:
Social support
Involvement of
family and
friends for
supervision
Availability
of physician

Trusting therapeutic
relationship not
established

Patient not
able to control
behavior

Consider immediate
hospitalization if
patient has serious
suicidal intent

