SUPERIOR VENA CAVAL SYNDROME
Frederick R. Ahmann, MD

A. Obstruction of the superior vena cava (SVC) occurs
when this thin-walled vessel is invaded, compressed, or
thrombosed. Blockage of the blood flow often leads to
development of the easily recognized superior vena
caval syndrome (SVCS) with venous distention, facial
edema, headache, tachypnea, cyanosis, and plethora.
SVCS is commonly characterized as an acute or subacute oncologic emergency. Establishing a diagnosis is
essential and can be accomplished safely even if biopsies of tissue exposed to elevated venous pressures and
a brief delay in the initiation of therapy are necessary.
B. In a patient with the previously noted signs and symptoms, confirmation that the SVC is obstructed usually is
not required because most patients have a mass visible
on imaging studies. However, should confirmation be
needed, this can be safely accomplished with either
contrast or a nuclear venography. Nuclear venography is
preferable because of a lower injection volume of contrast, but both are associated with low complication
rates.
C. Since the 1950s, bronchogenic carcinomas have been
the leading cause of SVCS. In the past decade, with the
increased use of intravascular devices, thrombosis
associated with such devices now may account for
approximately one fourth of cases. For many years
histologic confirmation of the diagnosis was thought to
be unnecessary because palliative radiotherapy was
the only treatment possible. Recent advances in the
treatment of lung cancers and lymphoproliferative
disorders, in addition to the increasing incidence of
benign causes for which radiotherapy is not palliative
and is potentially dangerous, mandate accurate
pretherapy assessment. Little evidence suggests that
diagnostic procedures (including bronchoscopy, lymph
node biopsies, mediastinoscopy, and thoracotomies)
carry an excessive risk. Therefore, the evaluation of

290

these patients should be similar to that of any patient
with a lung mass.
D. Standard palliative therapy for SVCS caused by a malignancy has been radiotherapy. Some debate persists
about the optimal dose, schedule, and fields of treatment, but in general, about 50%–70% of treated
patients are reported to achieve symptomatic improvement within 2 weeks of initiation of radiotherapy.
However, radiotherapy is no longer the sole or even
the initial therapy for many patients. In one review,
60% of all cases of SVCS were caused by lung cancer
or lymphomas. Thus, a majority of the causes of SVCS
are malignancies for which chemotherapy with or
without radiotherapy is needed to accomplish the
therapeutic objectives of improved quality of life and
prolonged survival. SVCS can cause distressing signs
and symptoms that should be palliated in a timely
fashion. However, because many such patients may
have lung cancer or lymphoma together with a definite
incidence of benign etiologies, an accurate histologic
diagnosis should be pursued in all patients with SVCS
unless there are extenuating circumstances. Only with
a definite histologic diagnosis can a rational therapeutic choice be made for both relieving SVCS and maximizing survival potential.
References
Ahmann FR. A reassessment of the clinical implications of the superior
vena caval syndrome. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:961.
Baker GL, Barnes HJ. Superior vena cava syndrome: etiology, diagnosis
and treatment. Am J Crit Care 1992;1:54.
Bigsby R, Greengrass R, Unruh H. Diagnostic algorithm for acute superior
vena caval obstruction. J Cardiovasc Surg 1993;34:347.
Perez CA, Presant CA, Van Amburg AL. Management of superior vena
cava syndrome. Semin Oncol 1978;5:123.
Rice JW, Rodriguez RM, Light, RW. The superior vena cava syndrome:
clinical characteristics and evolving etiology. Medicine 2006;85:37–42.

291
SUPERIOR VENA CAVAL SYNDROME Suspected

A History

Physical examination
Clinical diagnosis

B

Confirm Diagnosis
with Contrast or
Nuclear Venography
if indicated
Chest film
!
CT of chest

Mass

No mass
Observation

C

Pathologic Diagnosis:
Bronchoscopy
Lymph Node Biopsy
Mediastinoscopy
Thoracotomy

D Therapy

Small cell
lung cancer

Lymphoma

Chemotherapy
"
Radiotherapy
(if needed)

Non–small
cell lung cancer

Other
cancers

Radiotherapy
"
Chemotherapy (if needed)

Benign
lesions
SURGERY
(if needed)

