SYNCOPE


Syncope is defined as a loss of consciousness resulting
from decreased blood flow to the brain and is reported
to occur in up to 3% of all people during their lifetime.
The evaluation of syncope is centered on discriminating
between cardiac and noncardiac causes, because a cardiac
etiology has been associated with increased mortality.
A. The medical history, including family history, is an
important tool in diagnosing the etiology of syncope.
The patient’s age can provide a framework because
vasovagal syncope is common in younger individuals,
whereas orthostatic hypotension, sick sinus syndrome,
and heart block occur more commonly in the elderly.
B. The physical examination and ECG can yield important
clues to the etiology. Examples include orthostatic blood
pressures; cardiomegaly via palpation/percussion and
chest x-ray; carotid sinus hypersensitivity; and ECG evidence of previous myocardial infarction, atrioventricular
(AV) block, or long QT interval.
C. Studies have shown that the presence of structural
heart disease is associated with an increased risk of a
cardiac cause of syncope and is also associated with
increased mortality. Imaging modalities, including
echocardiogram, MRI, or contrast ventriculography,
can provide insight to pathology such as impaired
systolic function and wall motion abnormalities as well
as high-risk diseases such as valvular heart disease,
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, cardiac sarcoidosis, and
right ventricular dysplasia.
D. Supraventricular and ventricular tachyarrhythmias are
common among patients with structural heart disease.
Patients with syncope who have structural heart
disease concomitant with coronary artery disease or a
previous myocardial infarction may be considered
for electrophysiologic evaluation because ventricular
tachycardia is common in this group.
E. Electrophysiology testing consists of placing catheters
that have the ability to both pace and sense in various
sites within the heart. Commonly, electrograms are
recorded from the high right atrium, anterior septum
for bundle of His activation, and the right ventricle.
Electrophysiologic properties of the heart are obtained,
including refractory periods and AV nodal and HisPurkinje system conduction. In addition, programmed
stimulation is used to pace the heart in an attempt to
induce ventricular or supraventricular arrhythmias.
Electrophysiology testing is sensitive for detecting
ventricular tachycardia in the presence of an ischemic
80

F.

G.

H.

I.

cardiomyopathy but lacks sensitivity for nonischemic
cardiomyopathies. Patients with a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of !35% have a primary prevention indication for an implantable cardiac defibrillator
(ICD); therefore, syncope in this population should
lead to referral for an ICD with or without an electrophysiology study.
Bradyarrhythmias are common causes of syncope in
the elderly. Electrophysiology testing for bradycardia is
of more limited value in establishing the need for
permanent pacing; therefore, noninvasive monitoring
with a Holter monitor or event recorder can be used to
correlate symptoms with slow heart rates.
Syncope in the absence of structural heart disease is
often vasovagal in origin. This syndrome is characterized
by the onset of prodromal symptoms such as yawning,
nausea, or a feeling of warmth often provoked by
noxious stimuli followed by bradycardia, hypotension,
and syncope.
Tilt-table testing is a tool to aid in the diagnosis of
vasovagal syncope as well as orthostatic hypotension,
postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome, and vasodepressor syncope. The patient is secured to a table
that is tilted usually to 60 degrees in a quiet room
while blood pressure and heart rate are monitored.
Patients with vasovagal syncope will have variable
responses, and most will develop their usual prodromal symptoms associated with a decrease in blood
pressure and/or heart rate (sensitivity 70%). This is
often associated with loss of consciousness that resolves with placing the patient back in the supine
position.
Syncope in a patient with a normal heart and a negative
tilt-table test result can safely be referred for a cardiac
monitor to record heart rates and rhythm as an outpatient if an arrhythmia is suspected. A Holter monitor is
a device the patient wears for 24 or 48 hours that
records every beat. Continuous looping event monitors
are worn by the patient and can record prospective and
retrospective heart rhythms and can be patient activated with symptoms. A nonlooping event monitor
records only when the patient activates the monitor. A
continuous looping event monitor is preferable in a
patient with syncope. Additionally, an implantable event
monitor is a small device implanted just left of the
sternum. It can be patient activated when symptoms
occur or is automatically activated with slow or fast
heart rates and can remain in place for 1–2 years.

81
Patient with SYNCOPE

A Medical history
B Physical examination
ECG

C Imaging to evaluate

for structural heart disease

G Structural heart

D Structural heart

disease absent and
recurrent syncope

disease present

Tachyarrhythmia
suspected

E Electrophysiologic

testing/ICD therapy*

Bradyarrhythmia
suspected

H Tilt-table testing
(nondiagnostic)

F Noninvasive monitoring/
pacemaker implantation

I Consider implantable or
external event recorder

*ICD placement without EP testing is indicated if the LVEF is severely reduced.

References
Benditt DG. Pathophysiology and causes of syncope. In Cardiac
Arrhythmia: Mechanisms, Diagnosis and Management. Baltimore:
Williams & Wilkins, 1995:1073–1084.

Calkins H. Syncope. In Zipes D, Jalife J, eds. Cardiac Electrophysiology:
From Cell to Bedside. Philadelphia: WB Saunders:, 2000:873–881.
Kapoor W. Evaluation and management of syncope. JAMA 1992;268:
2553–2560.
Kapoor W. Syncope. N Engl J Med 2000;343:1856–1862.

