SYSTOLIC MURMURS

Cardiac murmurs are generated by turbulent blood flow
and adjacent soft-tissue vibration. Turbulent or nonlaminar
blood flow occurs in response to rapid acceleration or deceleration of flow such as that which occurs across a narrowed valve or vessel segment.
A. The initial goal after the detection of a murmur is to
identify the portion(s) of the cardiac cycle at which the
murmur can be heard. At slow heart rates (!80 beats
per minute) systole can be identified by auscultation
because it has a shorter duration than diastole. As heart
rate increases, systole and diastole become more difficult to separate, and separation should be done by simultaneous palpation of the carotid arterial pulse.
Murmurs in systole have several possible causes,
including regurgitant flow across an atrioventricular
(AV) valve (mitral or tricuspid), forward flow though a
stenotic or abnormal semilunar valve (aortic or pulmonary), or flow through an anatomic defect (ventricular
septum).
Once a murmur has been determined to be systolic in
timing, a series of steps can be undertaken to identify
the exact cause. These include a determination of
the murmur’s location of optimal auscultation, configuration, quality, duration, and radiation. Provocative
maneuvers can then be used to confirm the suspected
pathology.
B. Location: Murmurs generated by flow across the
semilunar valves are loudest in intensity at the left
(pulmonic valve) and right (aortic valve) sternal border
in the 2nd intercostal space (ICS). Those caused by AV
valve pathology are heard lower on the chest wall at the
left sternal border, 5th–6th ICS (tricuspid valve), and
in the mid-clavicular line, 5th–6th ICS (mitral valve).
Intensity: Murmur intensity is graded on a 6-point
scale, with 1 being barely audible and 6 being audible
without the assistance of a stethoscope. Intensity does
not reliably correlate with the amount of turbulent
blood flow or with the clinical relevance of the murmur. Intensity should be assessed primarily as a means
of determining a baseline, which is helpful in the assessment of disease progression and response to therapy.
C. Configuration: The murmurs of systole either have a
diamond-shaped crescendo-decrescendo or a uniform,
holosystolic configuration. Murmurs caused by the
forward ejection of blood through one of the semilunar

70

valves are generally of the crescendo-decrescendo variety, whereas those generated by regurgitant flow
through an AV valve are usually holosystolic.
Quality: Several common systolic murmurs have
distinct audible qualities that can be helpful in determining the etiology. The murmur of aortic stenosis
tends to be a harsh, grating murmur, whereas that of
mitral regurgitation has a gentle, blowing quality.
Duration: Systolic murmurs can exist for the entire
duration of the systolic period or can occur only early or
late in the period. AV valve regurgitation without a prolapse etiology and ventricular septal defects can be
confined to early systole or can persist for the entire
ejection period. Murmurs beginning after the onset of
systole (late systolic) are generally caused by AV valve
prolapse and ensuing regurgitation.
D. Provocative Maneuvers: Several maneuvers that
alter both cardiac blood flow and intracardiac volume
can be used to clarify the cause of a systolic murmur.
Abrupt standing and execution of the Valsalva maneuver reduce cardiac return, thereby diminishing preload, intracardiac volume, and transvalvular flow.
These maneuvers decrease the intensity of all systolic
murmurs other than the murmur of hypertrophic
obstructive cardiomyopathy (HOCM). Passive leg
raise, handgrip, standing and squatting, and inspiration are all maneuvers that can help to differentiate
murmurs.
E. Radiation: Radiation of the murmur away from the
point of loudest intensity can provide diagnostic clues.
Mitral valve regurgitation murmurs can radiate to the
axilla (anterior leaflet incompetence) or to the anterior
chest wall (posterior leaflet incompetence). Aortic
stenosis murmurs often radiate superiorly into the
carotid arteries, while the otherwise-indistinguishable
murmur of aortic valve sclerosis remains confined to
the sternal border.
F. The management of systolic murmurs depends on the
etiology, the acuity, and the hemodynamic significance
of the underlying abnormality. Echocardiography can
be used to confirm the cause of a systolic murmur and
to determine the consequence of the structural abnormality. Both aortic stenosis and mitral regurgitation
can exist for long periods without the presence of
clinical symptoms or the need for treatment. The development of symptoms or objective evidence of left
ventricular dysfunction is an indication for valve repair

71
Patient with SYSTOLIC MURMUR

A

Confirm timing is systolic

Determine intensity (grade 1–6)
Determine quality (harsh vs. blowing)
Determine timing within systole

B

Left sternal border,
2nd ICS

C

Right sternal border,
2nd ICS

E

F

D

↓ with Valsalva
↑ with passive
leg raise

↑ with Valsalva
↓ with passive
leg raise

D

Assess for
radiation

HOCM

Radiates to
carotids

No radiation

Aortic
stenosis

Aortic
sclerosis

Obtain:
Echocardiogram
Consider:
Aortic valve surgery

F

F

Left sternal border,
5th ICS

Mid-clavicular line,
6th ICS

Holosystolic
Late systolic
Harsh quality
C Holosystolic
click absent
click present
Crescendodecrescendo
Opening click
Blowing quality
Harsh quality
Blowing
V waves present V waves absent

Crescendo-decrescendo

Harsh

D

Identify location of loudest intensity

D

D

↑ with inspiration

↑ with inspiration

Pulmonic
stenosis

Obtain:
Echocardiogram
Consider:
Valvuloplasty

E

Mitral regurgitation

F

Click earlier with
standing, later
with squatting

Radiates to axilla

Obtain:
Echocardiogram
Consider:
Surgery

Obtain:
Echocardiogram
Consider:
Medical therapy
Septal reduction

or replacement surgery. Tricuspid regurgitation is most
often clinically benign but can be repaired if it is both
severe and thought to be the cause of heart failure.
Pulmonic stenosis is rare in adult patients because it is
most frequently a congenital lesion. If detected in the
adult, percutaneous valvuloplasty can be curative. Ventricular septal defects in the adult patient occur most
commonly as a complication of myocardial infarction.
Post–myocardial infarction ventricular septal defects
carry a high short-term risk of mortality and should
prompt urgent surgical repair.

D

Ventricular
septal defect

Tricuspid
regurgitation

F

↑ with handgrip

Mitral prolapse
with regurgitation

Obtain:
Echocardiogram
Consider:
Medical afterload
reduction
Mitral valve surgery

References
ACC/AHA guidelines for the management of patients with valvular heart
disease. J Am Coll Cardiol 1998;32(5):1486–1588.
Chen CR, Cheng TO, Huang T, et al. Percutaneous balloon valvuloplasty
for pulmonic stenosis in adolescents and adults. N Engl J Med
1996;335(1):21–25.
Maron BJ, McKenna WJ, Danielson GK, et al. American College of
Cardiology/European Society of Cardiology clinical expert consensus
document on hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. A report of the American
College of Cardiology Foundation Task Force on Clinical Expert Consensus Documents and the European Society of Cardiology Committee for Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol 2003;42(9):1687–1713.

