TEMPOROMANDIBULAR PAIN

A. History and physical examination are particularly helpful for identifying nonmusculoskeletal causes of pain
near the temporomandibular joint (TMJ). Many nearby
structures can become inflamed or infected. Otitis is
often accompanied by ear pain, tinnitus, and hearing
loss, and middle ear effusion and/or inflammation or
damage to the tympanic membrane should be evident
on otoscopy. Parotitis features tenderness and often
swelling of the parotid gland, inferior to the TMJ, and
observing the mouth while massaging the gland may
reveal blocked flow or flow of purulent material from
the orifice near the upper molars. Pain of dental origin
is indicated by focal tenderness to palpation of the
gums or percussion of the teeth. Sinusitis, particularly
of the maxillary sinus, may feature purulent nasal
drainage, tenderness over the sinus, and absence of
exacerbation with minor movements of the jaw or with
isometric use of the muscles of mastication. Temporal
arteritis should be considered in a patient !50 years
old with temporal headache and is often associated
with fever, weight loss, jaw claudication (different from
jaw pain apparent after initial movement), tenderness
of the scalp and/or temporal artery, and (most ominously) transient or permanent monocular visual loss.
B. Trigeminal neuralgia is often suggested by a history of
severe but transient episodes of pain over one side of
the face, often worst at or seeming to originate from the
preauricular region. Response to a trial of carbamazepine, which is generally ineffective for nonneuropathic
causes of pain, may be more helpful diagnostically than
the physical examination or diagnostic tests.
C. Pain in the TMJ itself is suggested by absence of the
previously listed findings and by the presence of others. Pain with chewing or with tooth clenching is
characteristic but nonspecific. Examination of the
TMJ should include palpation both externally and
internally (with the examiner’s little finger in the
patient’s external auditory canal) while the patient is
moving the jaw, paying attention to symmetry. Abnormalities on examination are, unfortunately, common
in the asymptomatic population. Plain radiography is
indicated as a first diagnostic test in chronic cases,
unless the patient has evidence of a systemic inflammatory arthritic disease. Transcranial lateral views
comparing the TMJs are generally used, and other
views are available. CT and particularly MRI, however, are far more sensitive for appreciation of osseous
changes, displacement of the articular disk, and detection of fractures and tumors. These techniques have
largely replaced arthrography of the TMJ.
550

D. Osteoarthritis of the TMJ often features crepitus on
examination. It usually follows internal derangement,
so features of that disorder may coexist (see E). Imaging shows joint space narrowing and sclerosis and
osteophyte formation of the adjoining bone.
E. Internal derangement is the most common disorder of
the TMJ. It can be posttraumatic but usually results
from ligamentous laxity and affects women more commonly than men. A history of chronic or transient inability to fully open the mouth (trismus) is common, and
a palpable click may be noted during jaw movement on
examination. MRI is the best diagnostic technique; CT
is also effective.
F. Inflammatory arthritides such as rheumatoid arthritis,
psoriatic arthritis and other seronegative spondyloarthropathies, and systemic lupus can all involve the
TMJ, although involvement of the TMJ is usually of
less consequence than that of other joints. TMJ involvement in gout or calcium pyrophosphate deposition disease (CPPD) is extremely rare. The TMJs are
commonly involved in juvenile rheumatoid arthritis,
however, and joint damage during skeletal growth can
lead to a characteristic micrognathia.
G. The muscles of mastication are a frequent cause of
temporomandibular pain, often in isolation and sometimes with coexisting features of internal derangement
and/or osteoarthritis. A history of nocturnal teeth
clenching and grinding (bruxism) may be obtainable
from a patient’s sleep companion (if available). Pain is
often noted with isometric contraction of the muscles
of mastication, and those muscles amenable to examination (masseter, temporalis) are often tender.
H. Facial pain of unknown etiology may occur in isolation
or as part of a more widespread pain syndrome such as
fibromyalgia. Tension headaches can include pain
around the TMJ region in some patients. In both cases,
pain is usually but not always bilateral. In the absence
of a widespread pain syndrome, persistent unilateral
pain of obscure origin merits imaging by MRI or CT to
rule out neoplasm.

References
Marbach JJ. Temporomandibular pain and dysfunction syndrome.
History physical examination, and treatment. Rheum Dis Clin North
Am 1996;22:477–498.
Siccoli MM, Bassetti CL, Sandor PS. Facial pain: clinical differential
diagnosis. Lancet Neurol 2006;5:257–267.
Wadhwa S, Kapila S. TMJ disorders: future innovations in diagnostic and
therapeutics. J Dent Educ 2008;72:930–947.

551
Patient with TEMPOROMANDIBULAR PAIN
History
Physical examination

A Nearby structures

inflamed:
Otitis
Parotitis
Sinusitis
Dental
Temporal arteritis

B Neuralgia

D Osteoarthritis

C Articular

G Muscular

Consider:
Radiography
CT
MRI

E Inflammatory
arthritis

F Internal

derangement

H Structure

indeterminate
Consider:
Atypical facial pain
Tension headache

