TESTS OF THYROID FUNCTION

The modern clinical laboratory offers several tests of thyroid function. The physician must be aware of the diagnostic accuracy and limitations of these tests. Abnormal test
results must be interpreted with good clinical judgment.
Thyroid function tests are probably not cost-effective as
routine screens for thyroid disease.
Sensitive Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone (sTSH): A very
useful test. Immunometric assays for TSH were introduced in the early 1980s. These assays generally make it
possible to distinguish hyperthyroid from euthyroid patients. The sTSH is elevated in hypothyroidism. The sTSH
assay has virtually no cross-reactivity with luteinizing hormone (LH), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), and human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG). The normal range for
an sTSH assay is about 0.4–6.2 !U/ml.
Free Thyroxine Index (FTI): A useful calculation may
soon be obsolete as new immunoassays for free thyroxine
(FT4) become available:
FTI " total T4 # T3 Resin Uptake
This calculation “corrects” the total T4 for protein-binding
abnormalities. In general, the FTI is a good estimate of
free thyroid hormone concentration, although serum TSH
is a better indicator of the total body thyroid status.
Free Thyroxine (FT4): FT4 is the amount of non–
protein-bound circulating thyroxine (about 0.03%). Previously, measurement of FT4 was difficult and time-consuming
(equilibrium dialysis). Two-step immunoassays are now available to measure FT4 quickly and accurately and probably will
replace the calculated FTI.
Triiodothyronine by RIA (T3 RIA): Measures total T3.
Useful only in diagnosing T3 toxicosis.
Thyroid Antimicrosomal (TMab) and Antithyroglobulin
(TgAb) Antibodies: These antibodies may be elevated in

Graves’ disease and Hashimoto’s thyroiditis. A patient may
have Hashimoto’s thyroiditis and no circulating antibodies.
Positive antibodies also are found in portions of the general population and in patients with nonthyroidal illness.
24-Hour Radioactive Iodine Uptake (RAIU): Measures
the thyroid’s ability to metabolize iodine. The test uses a
tracer amount of 123I or 131I given orally. A gamma scintillation counter is used to measure the radioactivity over the
thyroid at 4–6 hours and 24 hours after the dose. Normal
percentage uptake varies widely. By itself, this test is not a
very accurate test of thyroid function, but it is used frequently in the diagnostic evaluation of patients with hyperthyroidism.
Thyroid Imaging–Radionuclide Scan (123I or 99mTc
pertechnetate): Does not produce a picture like a CT or
MRI scan. Can provide information about gland/lobe contour. Identifies thyroid nodules as “hot” (functioning),
“cold” (nonfunctioning), or “warm.”
References
Bauer DC, Brown AN. Sensitive thyrotropin and free thyroxine testing in
outpatients: are both necessary? Arch Intern Med 1996;156:2333.
Behnia M, Gharib H. Primary care diagnosis of thyroid disease. Hosp
Pract (Off Ed) 1996;31:121.
Bethune JE. Interpretation of thyroid function tests. Dis Mon
1989;35:543.
Kaye TB. Thyroid function tests: application of newer methods. Postgrad
Med 1993;94:81.
Klee GG, Hay ID. Sensitive thyrotropin assays: analytical and clinical
performance criteria. Mayo Clin Proc 1988;63:1123.
Santos ET, Mazzaferri EL. Thyroid function tests: guidelines for interpretation in common clinical disorders. Postgrad Med 1989;85:333.
Surks MI, Chopra IJ, Mariash CN, et al. American Thyroid Association
guidelines for use of laboratory tests in thyroid disorders. JAMA
1990;263:1529.

137

HYPOTHYROIDISM
Graham T. McMahon, MD, MMSc

Clinically apparent hypothyroidism affects about 2%
of adult women and about 0.2% of adult men. Primary
hypothyroidism refers to intrinsic thyroid failure and
accounts for 99% of cases; secondary hypothyroidism
refers to hypothyroidism that results from pituitary
dysfunction.
A. Patients with hypothyroidism may present with a variety
of nonspecific symptoms. Some of the most common
features include dry skin, cold intolerance, weight gain,
constipation, and fatigue. The clinical picture of hypothyroidism is now a good deal milder because thyrotropin
screening became more common. The most common
signs in patients with moderate to severe hypothyroidism
include bradycardia, delayed ankle reflexes, periorbital
puffiness, and coarse hair. The term myxedema refers to
the appearance of the skin and subcutaneous tissues in a
patient with severe hypothyroidism.
B. The most common cause of primary hypothyroidism
in iodine-sufficient areas is chronic autoimm
une (Hashimoto’s) thyroiditis. This is most common
among older women and is generally permanent.
Thyroidectomy, radioiodine treatment, and external
radiation therapy are other frequent causes of hypothyroidism. Both iodine deficiency and excess can cause
hypothyroidism. Iodine deficiency is a type of hypothyroidism associated with goiter. It is the most common
cause of hypothyroidism worldwide but is uncommon
in the United States, where iodine is added to salt.
Acute administration of iodine suppresses thyroxine
(T4) synthesis; however, patients recover their thyroid
function after just a few days of treatment. Other drugs
that cause hypothyroidism include antithyroid medications (e.g., methimazole, propylthiouracil), amiodarone,
lithium, and interferon-!.
C. Thyrotropin (or thyroid-stimulating hormone [TSH])
is the most sensitive marker of thyroid function. Patients with a TSH level of "10 #U/L should be treated
with replacement T4 with a target TSH of between
1 and 2 #U/L. Levothyroxine has a long half-life, and
once-daily treatment results in a nearly constant serum
T4 level. As a result of variations in the T4 content of
individual formulations, reassessment of the adequacy
of replacement is indicated if the formulation is

138

changed. The mean replacement dose of T4 is 1.6–1.8
#g/kg (75–112 #g/day in women and 125–200 #g/day
in men). A lower dosage should be initiated in the elderly and titrated. Patients who are obese require
doses that are approximately 20% higher. Drugs that
interfere with the absorption of levothyroxine include
cholestyramine, calcium carbonate, and ferrous sulfate. Patients receiving estrogen replacement also require a higher dosage of levothyroxine.
Combination replacement of liothyronine and levothyroxine is requested by some patients but is not
supported by the balance of clinical trial data. If instituted, 25 #g of levothyroxine can be replaced with
5 #g of liothyronine. Desiccated thyroid, liothyronine
alone, and other thyroid preparations are not recommended.
D. Patients with a TSH of 5–10 #U/L with a low free T4
level should be treated with replacement levothyroxine. Patients with a TSH of 5–10 #U/L with a normal
(T4) level are most likely to have subclinical hypothyroidism. Testing for the presence of thyroid peroxidase
antibody can be helpful in such patients because it
predicts the progression to permanent hypothyroidism. These patients should be monitored for the development of more severe hypothyroidism, or levothyroxine can be initiated at the outset.
Hypothyroidism can be transient when related to
thyroiditis. Inflammation of the thyroid gland can be
painful or entirely painless. Hypothyroidism occurring
postpartum is one of the most common presentations
of thyroiditis. Transient hypothyroidism lasts as long as
6 months, but the hypothyroidism will have resolved in
a significant majority of patients within 3 months.
Transient hypothyroidism can be difficult to distinguish from Hashimoto’s thyroiditis. It is reasonable to
attempt to reduce the dosage of levothyroxine by 50%
after approximately 3 months in patients who are suspected to have had transient hypothyroidism. If the
TSH measured 6 weeks later rises, then the initial dosage is reinstated; if the TSH is stable, then T4 can be
withdrawn and the TSH checked again.
E. Central hypothyroidism should be suspected if the
TSH is normal or low and the T4 level is low. These
patients should have their T4 dose titrated to the level

139
Patient with HYPOTHYROIDISM

A History

Physical examination

B Exclude other causes

Measure TSH
and free T4

C TSH "10 #U/L

D TSH 5–10 #U/L

Free T4 low

E TSH $5 #U/L
Central hypothyroidism
Post hyperthyroid
hypothyroidism
Assay artefact

T4 normal
Subclinical
hypothyroidism

Treat with
levothyroxine
titrated to
TSH of 1–2 #U/L

F Increase

dosage by 30%
among pregnant
women and
titrate to TSH

TPO antibody
positive

TPO antibody
negative

Risk of hypothyroidism
is high

Monitor

MRI pituitary
and evaluate
adrenal and
gonadal axes

Monitor or treat

of free T4. Patients receiving high-dose salicylates or
phenytoin appear to have low TSH levels as a result of
an assay artifact.
F. Levothyroxine requirements increase as early as
the fifth week of gestation. Given the importance of
maternal euthyroidism for normal fetal cognitive
development, women with hypothyroidism should
have their levothyroxine dosage increased by approximately 30% as soon as pregnancy is confirmed.
Thereafter, serum thyrotropin levels should be monitored and the levothyroxine dosage should be adjusted accordingly.

References
Basaria S, Cooper DS. Amiodarone and the thyroid. Am J Med
2005;118(7):706–714.
Clarke N, Kabadi UM. Optimizing treatment of hypothyroidism. Treat
Endocrinol 2004;3(4):217–221.
Cooper DS. Clinical practice. Subclinical hypothyroidism. N Engl J Med
2001;345(4):260–265.
Escobar-Morreale HF, Botella-Carretero JI, Escobar del Rey F, Morreale
de Escobar G. Treatment of hypothyroidism with combinations of
levothyroxine plus liothyronine. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2005;90(8):
4946–4954.
Ibay AD, Bascelli LM, Nashelsky J. Management of subclinical
hypothyroidism. Am Fam Physician 2005;71(9):1763–1764.
Pearce EN, Farwell AP, Braverman LE. Thyroiditis. N Engl J Med
2003;348(26):2646–2655.

