THE ACUTELY ILL PATIENT WITH HIV


A. A careful history and physical examination are crucial
to the care of an acutely HIV-positive patient. In particular, the history should focus on localizing features
of the illness, recent exposures, prior infections, severity of HIV, and medication history. Attention to localizing symptoms and exposures (including sexual and
environmental exposures) help narrow the differential
diagnosis and focus the workup. This chapter highlights several common presentations of acute illness in
HIV-positive patients: CNS symptoms, respiratory tract
symptoms, odynophagia, diarrhea, genitourinary complaints, dermatologic complaints, and systemic febrile
illnesses.
B. In addition to focusing on localizing symptoms, the
history should focus on the status of the patient’s HIV
disease. All patients with HIV, regardless of CD4 cell
count, are susceptible to community pathogens. However, the CD4 cell count is predictive of their susceptibility to opportunistic pathogens. Patients with a
CD4 cell count !200 and a total percentage of CD4
cells of !14% are less susceptible to opportunistic
pathogens such as Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia
(PCP). In contrast, patients with CD4 cell counts
"50 are susceptible to a large number of opportunistic pathogens, including PCP, toxoplasmosis, Cryptococcus, JC virus, cytomegalovirus (CMV), and Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC). Thus knowledge of
the most recent CD4 count is extremely helpful in
directing the workup based on the patient’s risk for
opportunistic pathogens.
C. The medication history should focus on current antiretroviral and prophylactic medications. Antiretroviral
medications have been associated with a number of side
effects that mimic acute infectious illnesses. Some of
these side effects are specific to the class of antiretroviral medication; whereas others are specific to the
particular drug. For example, protease inhibitors commonly cause diarrhea, whereas nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors can infrequently cause lactic acidosis
that presents as severe abdominal pain, nausea, and
vomiting. In contrast, abacavir and nevirapine cause
severe drug-specific side effects. Abacavir infrequently
causes a life-threatening hypersensitivity syndromemanifesting as fever, malaise, and rash; nevirapine can cause
severe hepatotoxicity.
Prophylactic medications for the prevention of opportunistic infections in patients with HIV sometimes

330

cause severe drug reactions. For example, chronic
dapsone use rarely may cause methemoglobinemia
(particularly in patients with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase [G6PD] deficiency) that presents with
dyspnea and fatigue. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
is a common cause of rash and other symptoms such as
nausea and vomiting.
D. Respiratory System: The differential diagnosis for an
HIV-infected patient with respiratory symptoms regardless of CD4 cell count includes bacterial pneumonia, influenza (if in season), tuberculosis (if exposure
history is present), drug toxicity, and other respiratory
viruses. In particular, patients with HIV are at increased risk for bacterial pneumonia compared with
patients without HIV; the risk is further increased
among patients with CD4 counts of "200. Workup of
respiratory symptoms should include chest imaging
and, if appropriate by history and risk factors, rapid
testing for influenza and induced sputum for acid-fast
bacillus (AFB). If the CD4 cell count is "200 and the
patient is not taking adequate PCP prophylaxis, then
PCP should be sought by special stains on induced
sputum or bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. Drug toxicity,
including abacavir hypersensitivity, dapsone-related
methemoglobinemia, and nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor–associated lactic acidosis, can also
present as dyspnea and tachypnea and should be considered in patients taking relevant medications. For
more details see the chapter Respiratory Symptoms in
HIV-Infected Patients (p. 322).
E. Central Nervous System: Patients with HIV infection
who present with new mental status changes or other
neurologic symptoms should be worked up as described in the chapter Central Nervous System Infection in the HIV-Infected Patient (p. 326). Patients with
HIV presenting with a new change in vision or eye pain
require rapid ophthalmologic evaluation. The differential diagnosis for ophthalmologic symptoms in patients
with a low CD4 count includes CMV retinitis, toxoplasmosis, and syphilis, among other diagnoses.
F. Dysphagia and Odynophagia: Dysphagia and odynophagia are common problems in the HIV-positive
patient. The differential diagnosis, in addition to bacterial pharyngitis and viral upper respiratory tract infection, includes esophageal candidiasis, herpes simplex or CMV esophagitis, and aphthous ulcers. If oral
candidiasis is present on examination, then empiric
(Continued on page 332)

331
ACUTELY ILL PATIENT WITH HIV
History and physical examination with
special attention to:
A Localizing symptoms and exposures

B HIV history (CD4 cell count and prior infections)
C Medication history

D Respiratory
complaints

E CNS

See p 322

Diarrhea

Genitourinary
complaints

Cont’d on p 333

Cont’d on p 333

Change in
vision or
eye pain

New
nonvisual
neurologic
symptom

Ophthalmology
referral

See p 326

F Dysphagia

Odynophagia

Dermatologic
symptoms

Nonlocalizing
febrile illness

Cont’d on p 333

Cont’d on p 333

Assess for dehydration
and adequacy of oral
intake; consider admission

Oral thrush
present

Oral thrush
absent

Treat empirically for
candidiasis; if not
improved by treatment,
refer for endoscopy

Consider referral for
endoscopy to asses for:
HSV
CMV
Aphthous ulcers
Candida
Malignancy

332
treatment for esophageal candidiasis is a reasonable
approach. However, for cases that limit oral intake or
fail to improve with empiric therapy, workup with
endoscopic evaluation should be pursued.
G. Diarrhea. The differential diagnosis for diarrhea in the
HIV-infected patient is broad and includes medicationrelated diarrhea and infection secondary to bacteria, viruses, or parasites. The risk for bacterial diarrhea in particular is higher among patients with HIV than among
patients without HIV. This risk increases with severity of
HIV disease. In a large study of HIV-infected patients
with diarrhea, Clostridium difficile was the most common
cause of bacterial diarrhea, followed by Shigella and
Campylobacter. For patients with chronic symptoms,
consider medication-related diarrhea and parasitic infection with Cryptosporidium and Giardia. In patients with
CD4 cell counts "50, consider disseminated MAC infection. Workup should include stool culture for Shigella,
Salmonella, Campylobacter, Yersinia, pathogenic Escherichia coli, and Vibrio; stool C. difficile toxin testing; stool
examination for ova and parasites (O&P); and blood isolators for mycobacteria if the CD4 cell count is "50.
H. Genitourinary Symptoms. Assessment of genitourinary
complaints in HIV-positive patients requires a thorough
exposure history, including recent sexual encounters.
HIV-positive patients are susceptible to common genitourinary problems such as urinary tract infections;
nephrolithiasis; and common sexually transmitted diseases such as syphilis, gonorrhea, chlamydia, and trichomonas. They are also at risk for less common genitourinary diseases such as chancroid, lymphogranuloma
venereum (LGV), and adenovirus. Medication side effects such as indinavir-related nephrolithiasis should
also be considered. Workup includes a genital examination for ulcers or chancres; urinalysis and urine culture;
nucleic acid testing of urine, urethral swab, or cervical
swab for chlamydia and gonorrhea; fluorescent antigen
testing for herpes simplex virus (HSV) and viral culture
of genital ulcers; serum rapid plasma reagin (RPR) test;
and, if suggested by history, workup for less common
illnesses such as LGV. After a high-risk sexual exposure,
chlamydia and gonorrhea are often treated empirically.
I. Dermatologic Symptoms. Dermatologic disease is
more common in HIV-infected patients than in non–
HIV-infected patients. Common dermatologic problems associated with HIV infection include viral infection of the skin and mucous membranes, such as
herpes simplex, varicella-zoster, and molluscum contagiosum; systemic bacterial infection with a dermatologic
component, such as bacillary angiomatosis (Bartonella
henselae) and syphilis; superficial bacterial infection of
the skin, including ascesses resulting from methicillinresistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA); systemic
fungal infection (particularly in patients with low CD4
counts), such as cryptococcosis and blastomycosis;

parasitic infections, such as scabies; primary dermatologic conditions associated with HIV, such as eosinophilic folliculitis; and hypersensitivity reactions to
medications such as trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.
Workup should be guided by the patient’s history (with
special attention to medications and exposures), the
appearance of the lesion, and the absence or presence
of systemic symptoms. Consider admission for patients
with systemic or severe symptoms. Promptly refer to
dermatology for biopsy in any case in which diagnosis
or treatment is not clear.
J. Systemic febrile illnesses. Assessment of a febrile patient with HIV infection without localizing symptoms
requires a careful history, paying particular attention to
exposures, medications, CD4 cell count, and history
of previous opportunistic infection. In HIV-positive
patients of any CD4 cell count, the differential diagnosis is broad and includes common viral and bacterial
infections such as influenza, parvovirus, hepatitis, and
MRSA infection; mycobacterial infection with MAC or
tuberculosis; endemic mycoses such as histoplasmosis
and blastomycosis; medication-related toxicities such
as abacavir hypersensitivity and nevirapine-associated
hepatitis; and HIV-related malignancies such as HIVassociated lymphoma. In patients with low CD4 cell
counts, opportunistic infections are also a major source
of fever. Pathogens causing fever in this setting include
MAC, PCP, cryptococcus, CMV, and B. henselae (bacillary angiomatosis). The workup should include CBC,
complete metabolic panel, blood cultures, pathogenspcifitesting based on exposure (e.g., influenza testing
during influenza season and induced sputum to evaluate for tuberculosis), and imaging. In patients with a
low CD4 cell count, additional workup should include
blood isolators for mycobacteria, serum cryptococcal
antigen, and induced sputum for PCP.

References
Bartlett JG, Gallant JE. 2007 Medical Management of HIV Infection.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Medicine, Health Publishing Business
Group, 2007.
Coopman SA, Johnson RA, Platt R, et al. Cutaneous disease and drug
reactions in HIV infection. N Engl J Med 1993;328:1670–1674.
Hirschtick RE, Glassroth J, Jordan MC, et al. Bacterial pneumonia in
persons infected with the human immunodeficiency virus. N Engl J
Med 1995;333:845–851.
Hoffman RM, Currier JS. Management of antiretroviral treatmentrelated complications. Infect Dis Clin North Am 2007;21:103–132.
Hot A, Schmulewitz L, Viard JP, et al. Fever of unknown origin in HIV/
AIDS patients. Infect Dis Clin North Am 2007;21:1013–1032.
Lopez FA, Sanders CV. Fever and rash in HIV-infected patients. UpTo
Date 2007.
Sanchez TH, Brooks JT, Sullivan PS, et al. Bacterial diarrhea in persons
with HIV infection, United States, 1992–2002. Clin Infect Dis
2005;41:1621–1627.
Wilcox CM, Monkemuller KE. Diagnosis and management of esophageal
disease in the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. South Med J
1998;91:1002–1008.

333
ACUTELY Ill PATIENT WITH HIV
(Cont’d from p 331)

G Diarrhea

Assess for
dehydration;
consider
admission

Stool studies:
Culture
C. difficile toxin
O&P
Review medications
If CD4 "50,
consider MAC
Consider referral
for endoscopy
in severe cases

H Genitourinary
complaints

If at risk for
sexually
transmitted
infections or
complaints of
genital ulcer,
perform
genital/pelvic
examination

If urinary
symptoms
are present,
get urine
sample

Urine, urethral,
or cervical swab
for gonorrhea
and chlamydia
If ulcer present,
get fluorescent
antigen testing
for HSV simplex
and viral culture
Blood tests:
RPR
Consider riskspecific tests
such as LGV
serologies

Urinalysis
Urine culture

I Dermatologic
symptoms

Thorough history:
Exposures
Medications
Systemic symptoms
Careful physical
examination
Treat obvious causes
Consider admission if
systemic symptoms
persist
Refer to dermatologist if:
Cause not clear
Empiric treatment
ineffective

J Nonlocalizing
febrile illness

Thorough history:
Exposures
Medications
CD4 cell count
History of
opportunistic
infections
Careful physical
examination

Laboratory tests:
CBC, complete
metabolic panel
Blood cultures
Consider exposurespecific testing
(e.g., induced sputum
for mycobacteria)
Consider imaging

If CD4 cell count is low, consider:
Blood isolators for
mycobacteria
Serum cryptococcal antigen
Induced sputum for PCP
Low threshold for lumbar
puncture

