THYROID FUNCTION TESTS IN NONTHYROIDAL ILLNESS

In hospitalized patients the incidence of true hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism is !1%. Clinical signs of thyroid
disease may be masked in acutely ill patients. Conversely,
some signs of severe illness mimic changes seen in thyroid
diseases. Serum triiodothyronine (T3) radioimmunoassay (RIA) usually is decreased in patients with acute illness. The thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) response to
thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) also usually is normal. It may be difficult to identify acutely ill patients with
hypothalamic or pituitary disease. A sensitive TSH (sTSH)
"10 #U/ml and low free thyroxine (T4) (FT4) are good evidence for primary thyroid failure.
A. The TSH and free thyroxine index (FTI) are the preferred tests for assessing the thyroxine level in this
setting.
B. Up to 50% of acutely ill patients have a decrease in
total T4 and/or T3. Both FT4 and sTSH usually are
normal, although they can be suppressed. The more
severe the illness, the more likely TSH and FTI suppression will be noted.
In the setting of acute illness, repeating thyroid function tests is very useful every 7–10 days. Thyroid test
abnormalities will improve in parallel with the patient’s
improving condition. The converse is true as well.
Numerous studies have documented that levothyroxine therapy does not improve the outcome of
patient’s with thyroid function abnormalities attributable to nonthyroidal illness.

150

C. Patients with nephrotic syndrome may have mildly
depressed FT4 and normal sTSH. Glucocorticoids in
stress doses acutely inhibit TSH secretion, and a
small decrement in both sTSH and FT4 may be observed. Dopamine infusions also cause acute suppression of TSH. In a truly hypothyroid patient receiving
a dopamine infusion and/or stress doses of glucocorticoids, the TSH may be suppressed into the normal
range.
D. Elevation of sTSH with normal FT4 is found in patients
recovering from a nonthyroidal illness. sTSH usually is
!20 #U/ml. Slight elevations of TSH commonly are
found in patients with chronic renal failure. Although
the pathophysiology is unknown, these patients have a
blunted TSH response to TRH.

References
Burmeister LA. Reverse T3 does not reliably differentiate hypothyroid
sick syndrome from euthyroid sick syndrome. Thyroid 1995;5:435.
Cavaliere RR. The effects of nonthyroid disease and drugs on thyroid
function tests. Med Clin North Am 1991;75:27.
Docter R, Krenning EP, dejong M, Henneman G. The sick euthyroid syndrome: changes in thyroid hormone serum parameters and hormone
metabolism (review). Clin Endocrinol 1993;39:499.
Faber J, Kirkegaena C, Rasmassen B, et al. Pituitary-thyroid axis in critical
illness. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1987;65:315.
Lim S, Fang V, Katz A, et al. Thyroid dysfunction in chronic renal failure:
a study of the pituitary-thyroid axis and peripheral turnover kinetics of
thyroxine and triiodothyronine. J Clin Invest 1977;60:522.

151
Patient with ACUTE OR CHRONIC MEDICAL ILLNESS OR MAJOR SURGERY

A sTSH and FT4

only if indicated clinically

B Normal sTSH and
normal FT4

Patient
euthyroid

C Normal to decreased
sTSH and normal to
decreased FT4

Likely due to nonthyroidal
illness; treat underlying
illness and if possible,
repeat TSH, FT4 in 7 days

Consult endocrinology if
question of central
hypothyroidism arises

D Normal to increased

sTSH and normal FT4

If corresponding to
improved patient
condition, likely
represents recovery
of nonthyroidal
illness effects on
thyroid functions

Repeat tests in
4–6 wk

