THYROID PAIN

The four main causes of thyroid pain are painful subacute
thyroiditis (PST), hemorrhage into a nodule, acute infectious
thyroiditis (AIT), and radiation thyroiditis (RT). Extremely
rare causes (including Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, rapidly enlarging thyroid carcinoma, and palpation- or trauma-induced
thyroiditis) are not discussed here.
A. PST (also known as de Quervain’s thyroiditis and subacute granulomatous thyroiditis) is a self-limited inflammatory disorder. PST typically follows an upper respiratory tract infection. The pain is usually but not always
bilateral. The onset of pain may be sudden or gradual,
and it often radiates to the ear, jaw, or throat. Associated
symptoms may include fever, myalgias, malaise, sore
throat, and dysphagia. Hyperthyroidism is usually present
at the time of diagnosis as a result of unregulated release
of thyroid hormone from the inflamed thyroid follicles,
but the dominant symptoms are thyroid pain and tenderness. Pain and hyperthyroidism typically last 2–6 weeks,
followed by euthyroidism, and then transient hypothyroidism in up to half of patients (or, rarely, permanent
hypothyroidism). Physical examination reveals a firm,
tender, moderately enlarged thyroid. Ultrasonography
(which need not be performed if the history and physical
examination strongly suggest the diagnosis) reveals an
enlarged and hypoechoic thyroid.
B. Hemorrhage into a nodule most commonly presents
with sudden onset of unilateral neck pain associated
with an increase in size of a preexisting nodule. Ultrasonography reveals a fluid-filled nodule. Thyroid function
test results are usually normal.
C. AIT results from bacterial (most common), fungal,
mycobacterial, or parasitic infection of the thyroid.
Risk factors include immunosuppression, preexisting
thyroid disorders, and pyriform sinus fistulas to the
thyroid. Patients are typically acutely ill, with sudden
onset of severe unilateral or bilateral thyroid pain and
tenderness (which may radiate to the ipsilateral ear or
jaw), fever, chills, dysphagia, and dysphonia. Thyroid
function tests are usually normal. Ultrasonography
reveals single or multiple discrete abscesses.
D. RT occurs rarely after radioactive iodine treatment of
hyperthyroidism and even more rarely after radioactive iodine remnant ablation in thyroid cancer. Pain
typically starts 5–10 days after treatment and resolves
within a few weeks. RT may cause hyperthyroidism as

146

E.

F.

G.

H.

I.
J.
K.

a result of unregulated release of thyroid hormone
from the inflamed thyroid follicular cells.
Typical findings early in the course of PST include
elevations in ESR and serum C-reactive protein (CRP),
increased or normal WBC count, and low (!5%) radioactive iodine uptake (RAIU).
Fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) of a hemorrhagic
nodule reveals bloody fluid containing few (if any)
thyroid cells. Any solid component of the nodule should
be biopsied.
ESR, serum CRP, and WBC count are typically
elevated in AIT, as in PST. In contrast to PST, overall
RAIU is usually normal (and abscesses appear hypofunctioning on thyroid scans). Samples obtained by
FNAB for cytology, Gram stain, and culture are diagnostic. Neck imaging should be performed to evaluate
for fistulas.
NSAIDs are usually given for pain relief, and oral glucocorticoids are given when NSAIDs are inadequate
or contraindicated (prednisone 40 mg daily or equivalent for 1 week, followed by a taper over 2–6 weeks;
the glucocorticoid can be increased and tapered more
slowly if pain recurs during withdrawal). If pain is not
relieved by NSAIDs, the diagnosis of PST should be
questioned. Symptoms of hyperthyroidism can be
treated with a beta blocker. Antithyroid drugs are not
used because there is no excess thyroid hormone
production.
Contents of the nodule should be aspirated. If hemorrhage recurs, surgical excision can be considered.
Treatment of AIT involves abscess drainage and targeted
parenteral antibiotic therapy. Any predisposing fistulas
must be corrected surgically to prevent recurrence.
As in PST, NSAIDs or oral glucocorticoids are given
for pain relief, and a beta blocker can be given for
symptoms of hyperthyroidism.

References
Farwell AP. Subacute thyroiditis and acute infectious thyroiditis. In
Werner SC, Ingbar SH, Braverman LE, et al, eds. Werner & Ingbar’s
the Thyroid: A Fundamental and Clinical Text, 9th ed. Philadelphia:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2005:536–547.
Pearce EN, Farwell AP, Braverman LE. Thyroiditis. N Engl J Med
2003;348(26):2646–2655.
The painful thyroid. Lancet 1986;1(8493):1308–1309.

147
Patient with THYROID PAIN
History and
physical examination

Recent history of
radioiodine therapy?

No

Yes

D RT

Serum TSH and
free thyroxine
Thyroid ultrasound

A Painful subacute

B Hemorrhage

C AIT

E Confirmatory tests:

F Confirmatory test:

G Confirmatory tests:

thyroiditis

ESR, CRP, WBC,
RAIU

H NSAIDs or

glucocorticoids
Beta blockers

into a nodule

FNAB

I Aspiration

Surgical excision

ESR, CRP, WBC
RAIU
FNAB
Neck imaging

J Abscess drainage
Antibiotics
Fistula surgery

K NSAIDs or

glucocorticoids
Beta blockers

