THYROID NODULE


In the United States, between 4% and 7% of the adult
population have a palpable thyroid nodule. Only 5% of
these are malignant. Other causes of nodules include thyroid cyst, a colloid nodule, a focal area of thyroiditis, and
a benign follicular neoplasm. Nodules can be solitary or
multiple. The risk of cancer is not lower when nodules are
multiple.
A. A thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) test is performed. A suppressed TSH level suggests a benign
hyperfunctioning nodule. Hyperfunctioning nodules
are so rarely malignant that if the TSH is suppressed,
fine needle aspiration (FNA) can be deferred. A normal or high TSH level does not obviate the need for
further investigation.
B. Perform clinical evaluation. High-risk features include
rapid tumor growth, regional lymphadenopathy, a firm or
hard nodule, and a family history of thyroid carcinoma or
multiple endocrine neoplasia. Risk increases more moderately with the following features: age younger than
20 years or older than 70 years; male gender; a history
of head and neck irradiation; a nodule !4 cm; or the
presence of local symptoms such as dysphagia, hoarseness, or cough. Patients with at least two high-risk features should be referred for surgical management.
C. FNA with ultrasonography can be performed in the
office and increases the sensitivity and specificity of
the FNA result (Marqusee, 2000). Ultrasonography
can detect high-risk features such as hypoechogenicity, microcalcifications, irregular margins, increased vascularity by Doppler, and evidence of local
lymphadenopathy.
Patients undergoing FNA do not typically need to stop
taking aspirin or anticoagulants. The procedure is safe
and well tolerated. Each lesion !1 cm in size should
be sampled with two to four passes of the needle.
Cystic nodules can be drained after any solid portion is

144

D.

E.

F.

G.

H.

aspirated, although most recur; use of sclerosants such
as ethanol and tetracycline has been disappointing.
Radionucleotide scanning uses iodine-123, iodine-131,
or technetium-99m-pertechnetate to detect whether a
nodule is functioning. A scan can also determine
whether a nodule is dominant within a multinodular
gland or retrosternal. A scan cannot accurately determine the size of a thyroid nodule.
Benign nodules can remain in situ. Repeat ultrasonography after 9–12 months to ensure that there has been
no significant change in size is suggested. Levothyroxine suppression is no longer recommended because
TSH must be suppressed to "0.1 mU/L to effectively
suppress nodular growth or formation and suppression
to this level is associated with an increased risk of bone
loss and atrial fibrillation.
Follicular neoplasm may be benign or malignant because cellular aspirates cannot distinguish these two. If
the patient prefers, or if the nodule is cold on radionucleotide scanning, then excision is recommended.
Malignant nodules should be excised with a total thyroidectomy and usually require postoperative thyroid
ablation with iodine-131. Disease recurrence can be
screened for using thyroglobulin measurements.
Nondiagnostic aspirates occur about 10% of the time.
If a second sample is again nondiagnostic, then referral
for surgical excision is appropriate.

References
Castro MR, Gharib H. Continuing controversies in the management of
thyroid nodules. Ann Intern Med 2005;142(11):926–931.
Hegedus L. Clinical practice. The thyroid nodule. N Engl J Med
2004;351(17):1764–1771.
Marqusee E, Benson CB, Frates MC, et al. Usefulness of ultrasonography
in management of nodular thyroid disease. Ann Intern Med
2000;133(9):696-700.
Silver RJ, Parangi S. Management of thyroid incidentalomas. Surg Clin
North Am 2004;84(3):907–919. Review.

145
Patient with THYROID NODULE

A History, physical examination,
and serum thyrotropin test

Low thyrotropin level

Normal or high
thyrotropin level

B Clinical evaluation

Scintigraphy

D Functioning nodule
C Ultrasonographically

Strong suspicion
of cancer

guided FNA biopsy

Surgery

F Nondiagnostic results

Diagnostic results

G Malignant
Surgery

Suspicious

Surgery

E Benign
No treatment with
clinicalfollow-up;
alternatives include
surgery, levothyroxine
therapy, ethanol injection,
and laser treatment
(experimental)

Repeat ultrasonographically
guided FNA biopsy

H Nondiagnostic results
Surgery

Radioiodine: alternatives
include no treatment,
surgery, ethanol injection,
and laser treatment
(experimental)

