TINNITUS


Tinnitus is a perceived sound that is not related to an
external source. It usually is described by patients as a ringing, clicking, humming, or blowing sound. Most patients
with tinnitus have an underlying otologic problem, most
commonly hearing loss. It is postulated that tinnitus is the
result of an imbalance between excitation and inhibition of
auditory pathways. The imbalance may occur at any level,
including cochlear hair cells, midbrain, and cortical central
auditory pathways.
A. Diagnosing the cause of tinnitus requires a detailed
history. Onset, duration, frequency, and localization are
helpful in the evaluation for the underlying cause.
Tinnitus may be caused by systemic disease, infection,
metabolic abnormalities, medication exposure, or inflammatory conditions. Review exposure to aminoglycosides, loop diuretics, salicylates, quinine, antimalarials,
NSAIDs, and any history of toxic exposure to heavy metals with the patient.
B. The physical examination should include a check of the
blood pressure, a head and neck examination, and an
auscultation for vascular bruits and heart murmurs.
C. If tinnitus is diffuse and not localized to either ear, consider encephalitis of the temporal lobe and psychiatric
illnesses. Auditory hallucinations are noted primarily in
patients with psychosis.
D. It occurs in objective (perceived by the examiner and
patient) and subjective (heard only by the patient)
forms.
E. Subjective tinnitus is more common than objective
tinnitus, but diagnosis of the underlying cause is more
difficult. The differential diagnoses of subjective tinnitus
are medication and toxic exposure, metabolic abnormalities, pathologic condition in the peripheral (cochlear) or
central (retrocochlear) pathways, anxiety, depression,
and dental disorders. Metabolic abnormalities include
hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism, hyperlipidemia, anemia, and zinc deficiency. The initial workup of a patient
should include a CBC, fasting glucose, triglycerides,
cholesterol, and thyroid-stimulating hormone. Pathologic
conditions of the ear associated with subjective tinnitus
include otosclerosis, chronic suppurative otitis media,

36

F.

G.

H.

I.

J.

Meniere’s disease, presbycusis, and noise-induced
hearing loss.
Objective tinnitus is rare. Causes include acquired and
congenital vascular malformations, neuromuscular disorders (palatal myoclonus, stapedius muscle spasm, and
temporomandibular disorders), intracranial tumors,
and structural defects of the ear. Objective tinnitus is of
two types: vascular and mechanical.
Pulsatile tinnitus refers to nonexternal sounds that are
amplified and synchronous with the patient’s pulse.
Benign intracranial hypertension, jugular bulb abnormalities, and aberrant carotid artery are included in
the differential diagnoses. High-resolution CT of the
temporal bones is needed when a retrotympanic mass
is noted on examination. MRI and angiography are
indicated for patients with normal otoscopic examination to evaluate for dural venous thromboses and to
look for the empty sella and small ventricles associated
with benign intracranial hypertension. Angiography is
used when atherosclerotic carotid artery disease,
fibromuscular dysplasia, and small dural arteriovenous
(AV) malformations are suspected and the patient is a
surgical candidate.
Stapedial muscle spasm–induced tinnitus is amplified
with external noise and is intermittent. Stapedial muscle
spasm is associated with facial nerve palsies, although
it can occur without them. Division of the stapedius
muscle and tensor tympani tendons is reserved for
severe cases. Long-term use of benzodiazepines for
stapedial muscle spasm is not recommended.
Palatal myoclonus is apparent on examination of the oral
cavity. The tinnitus is thought to be generated from the
opening and closing of the eustachian tube and the rubbing of mucosal surfaces. Electromyography (EMG) of
the palatal muscles confirms the diagnosis. Treatment
with benzodiazepines results in a decrease in anxiety.
Tinnitus associated with the patulous eustachian tube is
synchronous with breathing. The patient may experience
autophony (hearing of his or her own voice or breathing).
Rapid weight loss and high estrogen states (e.g., use
of birth control pills, postpartum) are associated with
patulous eustachian tubes.
(Continued on page 38)

37
Patient with TINNITUS

A History

Consider:
Systemic illness
Medication

B Physical examination

Consider:
Blood pressure
Cerumen impaction
Perforated tympanic
membrane
Otitis media
Localization of tinnitus

C Nonlocalized
tinnitus

Neurologic and
psychiatric
examination

D Localized
tinnitus

Auscultate external
canal, carotids, skull

Consider:
Encephalitis of
temporal lobe
Psychosis

Bruit or sound noted
on examination

No sound noted
on examination

E Subjective tinnitus
Consider:
90% otologic problem
Metabolic disorders
Depression/anxiety

F Objective tinnitus

G Pulsatile
Consider:
AV shunt
Arterial bruit
Venous hum
Valvular
murmur

Crackling

Clicking

Blowing

Worsens with
external noise

EMG of
palatal muscles

Tympanic
membrane
fluctuates with
respiration

H Stapedial

muscle spasm
Consider:
Division of
muscle

Tetanic
contractions

I Palatal

myoclonus

Consider:
Benzodiazepines

Cont’d on p 39

Cont’d on p 39

If no relief,
consider surgery
or botulinum
injection

Tympanometry

J Patulous

eustachian
tube

ENT consult

38
K. Hearing evaluations include assessment of sensorineural
hearing impedance testing and speech discrimination.
These tests assist in localizing the otologic deficit. Nonvibratory tinnitus lesions can be attributed to defects in the
cochlea (75%), CNS (18%), and middle ear (4%).
L. Peripheral tinnitus is associated with symmetric hearing
loss, usually gradual in onset. Presbycusis is common
with this condition. As hearing loss increases, tinnitus
increases. Treating the hearing loss may result in a
decrease in tinnitus because ambient background noise
is amplified. In patients with hearing loss that is not
treatable by a surgical procedure, a hearing aid may
improve the tinnitus. Hearing aids and masking devices
may be used together in patients who do not respond to
hearing aids alone. Medications should be given to
patients with severe disability.
M. Central tinnitus requires an evaluation for posterior
fossa problems, including cerebellopontine angle tumors. The most common cerebellopontine tumor is the
acoustic neuroma. Symptoms of an acoustic neuroma
include unilateral hearing loss, tinnitus, and disequilibrium. Distinguishing Meniere’s disease from acoustic
neuromas is difficult clinically. Meniere’s tinnitus is
intermittent, whereas the tinnitus of acoustic neuroma
is constant. Meniere’s disease is associated with vertigo
as distinguished from the disequilibrium of an acoustic
neuroma. MRI with gadolinium contrast to assess for
posterior masses is indicated for abnormal auditory

brainstem response (ABR) tests. The sensitivity for
acoustic neuromas !15 mm is greater with MRI with
gadolinium contrast than with high-resolution CT. In
patients with unilateral hearing loss and normal ABR
tests, surveillance is required at 6 months and 1 year to
assess for progression of symptoms. ENT referrals are
indicated for all patients with asymmetric hearing loss.
Treatment for tumors depends on the size, location,
and the patient’s preoperative state.
N. Conductive hearing loss requires evaluation for a
pathologic condition of the external and middle ear,
malignancy, glomus tumor, and cholesteatoma. Early
referral to ENT is recommended.
References
Crummer RW, Hassan GA. Diagnostic approach to tinnitus. Am J Family
Physician 2004;69:120.
Dinces EA. Tinnitus UpToDate 206. www.uptodate.com.
Dobie RA, Sakai CS, Sullivan MD, et al. Antidepressant treatment
of tinnitus patients: report of a randomized clinical trial and clinical
prediction of benefit. Am Otol 1993;14:18.
House JW. Tinnitus. In Rakel RE, Bope ET, eds. Conn’s Current Therapy.Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2005:45.
Johnson RM, Brummett R, Scheuning A. Use of alprazolam for relief
of tinnitus. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1993;119:842.
Marai K, Tyler RS, Harker LA, Stouffer JL. Review of pharmacologic
treatment of tinnitus. Am J Otol 1992;13:454.
Schleuning AJ II. Management of the patient with tinnitus. Med Clin
North Am 1991;75:1225.
Sismanis A, Smoker WRK. Pulsatile tinnitus: recent advances in diagnosis.
Laryngoscope 1994;104:681.

39
Patient with TINNITUS

Pulsatile tinnitus
(Cont’d from p 37)

Subjective tinnitus
(Cont’d from p 37)

Otoscopy

Normal

Retrotympanic mass

Magnetic Resonance
Angiography and
Imaging

High-Resolution CT of
Temporal Bones

Abnormal

Normal

Consider:
Benign intracranial
hypertension
Thrombosis of dural
sinuses
Atherosclerotic carotid
artery disease
Fibromuscular dysplasia
Small dural AV
malformations

Idiopathic

Consider:
Globus tympanicum
Aberrant carotid artery
Jugular bulb abnormalities
Glomus jugulare
ENT referral

Surgical referral
Hearing Evaluation

L Peripheral tinnitus/cochlear:

Symmetric hearing loss
Normal impedance
Normal speech discrimination
Consider:
Presbycusis
Noise-induced
hearing loss
Therapy:
Hearing Aids
Masking
Biofeedback
Medications

K Hearing loss
M Central tinnitus/retrocochlear:

Asymmetric hearing loss and/or
Abnormal impedance and/or
Abnormal speech discrimination
MRI with Gadolinium

Cochlear

Retrocochlear

Meniere’s disease

Consider:
Acoustic neuroma
Meningioma
Multiple sclerosis
Hydrocephalus

N Mixed or conductive
hearing loss

Consider:
External/middle
ear or nasopharyngeal
pathologic condition
See Hearing Loss, p 40

