TOXIC SHOCK SYNDROMES

Toxic shock syndromes are rare but life-threatening
infectious syndromes characterized by fever, hypotension,
and multisystem organ failure. They were first described
in 1978 in a case series of young women who became
critically ill with fever, rash, and hypotension soon after
onset of menstruation. The syndrome was linked to the
use of highly absorbent tampons colonized with a toxinproducing strain of Staphylococcus aureus. In subsequent
years, similar syndromes have been traced to extravaginal
infections with S. aureus, severe skin and soft-tissue infections with Streptococcus pyogenes, and rarely with other
bacteria. Approximately one third of cases of toxic shock
syndrome are now associated with postpartum and postsurgical wound infections, but cases have been reported of
the syndrome arising after infection of virtually any part of
the body, including sinusitis, arthritis, osteomyelitis, and
respiratory infections.
The syndrome is caused by elaboration of toxins by
bacteria colonizing or infecting the body. Both Staphylococcus and Streptococcus are capable of producing socalled superantigens that can rapidly activate massive
numbers of T cells at once. The clinical manifestations of
toxic shock syndrome are secondary to cytokine storms
precipitated by the activated T cells or directly by the
toxins themselves.
A. In patients with fever and hypotension an infectious
syndrome should be highly suspected and assiduously
sought. The presence of a diffuse erythroderma resembling a total body sunburn in a patient who has rapidly
become very ill is highly suggestive of a toxic shock syndrome, particularly that caused by S. aureus. Evidence
of other organ dysfunction, including confusion, profuse
diarrhea, severe myalgias, elevated liver enzymes, and
thrombocytopenia, confirms the diagnosis. The rash
classically desquamates but only 1–3 weeks after presentation; hence, this feature is not helpful for initial diagnosis. The formal case definition for staphylococcal toxic
shock syndrome (STSS) is given in Table 1. A thorough
examination for a locus of infection should follow,
including close assessment of any site of recent surgical
intervention and a full gynecologic examination to look
for retained tampons or contraceptive sponges. Sites of
recent surgery should be opened for irrigation and
drainage even if the wound does not appear infected
because local inflammatory responses can be blunted in
STSS. Any foreign material such as nasopharyngeal
packing or tampons should be removed. Blood cultures
should be drawn, although bacteremia is rarely found in
STSS.
336

Table 1 Toxic Shock Syndrome Clinical Case
Definition
• Temperature 38.9° C (102° F)
• Diffuse macular erythroderma
• Desquamation—1–2 weeks after onset of illness, particularly palms
and soles
• Systolic blood pressure 90 mm Hg
• Multisystem involvement—three or more of the following:
1. GI: vomiting or diarrhea at onset of illness
2. Muscular: severe myalgia or creatine phosphokinase level at least
twice the upper limit of normal for laboratory
3. Mucous membrane: vaginal, oropharyngeal, or conjunctival
hyperemia
4. Renal: BUN or creatinine at least twice the upper limit of normal
for laboratory or urinary sediment with pyuria (!5 leukocytes per
high-power field)
in the absence of urinary tract infection
5. Hepatic: total bilirubin, ALT, AST at least twice the upper limit
of normal
6. Hematologic: platelets !100,000/mm3
7. CNS: disorientation or alterations in consciousness without focal
neurologic signs when fever and hypotension are absent
• Negative results on the following tests, if obtained:
1. Blood, throat, or cerebrospinal fluid cultures (blood culture may
be positive for Staphylococcus aureusrom)
2. Rise in titer to Rocky Mountain spotted fever, leptospirosis, or
measles

B. Purpura and/or petechiae can be found in toxic shock
syndrome, but their presence should prompt a search
for other severe disease, including meningococcal or
pneumococcal meningitis, bacterial sepsis, Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF), dengue, leptospirosis, and
DIC. Both meningococcal and pneumococcal meningitis have been associated with adrenal hemorrhage and
necrosis leading to hypotension with purpura and/or
petechiae. The presence of meningismus helps to make
the diagnosis. RMSF is a bacterial infection caused by
Rickettsia rickettsiae. It is transmitted by tick bites and
is most commonly seen in the southeastern United
States. The rash usually first appears on the palms and
soles and is accompanied by fever with severe headache.
Dengue hemorrhagic fever is a viral illness acquired
from mosquito bites predominantly in tropical countries. It is characterized by fever, severe diffuse bone
pain, hypotension, and a petechial rash, particularly in
parts of the body exposed to pressure (e.g., the skin beneath a blood pressure cuff). Leptospirosis is a severe
acute febrile illness caused by the spirochete Leptospira. It is classically acquired by contact with animals or
their excretions, particularly from rabbits and rats. Patients complain of fever, chills, headache, myalgias, eye

337
Patient with TOXIC SHOCK SYNDROME

A Diffuse erythroderma

STSS
Staphylococcal scalded
skin syndrome
Heat stroke

B Petechiae/purpura

Meningococcemia
Pneumococcal sepsis
RMSF
Dengue
Leptospirosis
DIC

C Skin/soft-tissue infection
Streptococcal toxic
shock syndrome
Necrotizing fasciitis
Severe cellulites
STSS

D No skin findings

Streptococcal toxic
shock syndrome
Bacterial sepsis
Line infection
Device infection

E Toxic shock management

ICU-level supportive care
Surgical wound debridement
and/or removal of foreign bodies
Antibiotics (clindamycin, vancomycin,
penicillin)
"IV immunoglobulins

discomfort, and rash. Conjunctival injection, pharyngitis, pulmonary infiltrates, hepatitis, renal dysfunction,
and diffuse macular or maculopapular rash can be found
on evaluation. DIC is a serious consumptive coagulopathy and hemolytic process that can be precipitated by
sepsis, obstetric catastrophe, surgery, pancreatitis, or
toxin exposure. It is suggested by laboratory findings of
elevated creatinine, prolonged prothrombin time (PT)
and partial thromboplastin time (PTT), low fibrinogen,
anemia, thrombocytopenia, and the presence of schistocytes on peripheral blood smear.
C. Skin or soft-tissue infection in the presence of fever and
hypotension is suggestive of toxic shock syndrome caused
by S. pyogenes (group A beta-hemolytic Streptococcusrom). There is a predilection for these infections to arise
from recent surgical wounds. Pulmonary infections, including pneumonia and empyema with S. pyogenes, are
also well-described precipitants. Severe pain at the site
of infection, particularly pain out of proportion to examination findings, is a classic clue to an evolving streptococcal toxic shock syndrome with associated necrotizing
fasciitis. The soft-tissue infection is often rapidly progressive. In contrast to STTS, diffuse body rash is rarely seen,
whereas blood cultures are frequently positive.
D. Patients presenting with fever and hypotension in the
absence of rash should be evaluated for bacterial sepsis. Particular attention should be directed to any indwelling venous access devices or recently implanted
hardware that can act as common loci for infection. If
present in an unstable patient, every effort should be
made to remove these devices as soon as possible.
E. Treatment of toxic shock syndromes consists of
supportive care, antibiotic therapy, rapid surgical
debridement, and possibly IV immunoglobulins. Patients

with toxic shock syndrome often develop capillary leak
syndromes leading to refractory, sustained hypotension.
Aggressive fluid repletion and ICU-level management
are essential. Initial antibiotic therapy should include
clindamycin and vancomycin. Clindamycin is recommended because it impairs bacterial toxin production. It
has also been shown to be more active than penicillinderived products against S. pyogenes in patients with extremely high bacterial burden. Vancomycin should be
included in empiric regimens because of the increasing
prevalence of methicillin resistance among community
and hospital S. aureus isolates. Penicillin can be included
if there is a high suspicion that the patient has streptococcal toxic shock syndrome. Rapid, aggressive surgical debridement is essential to decreasing the patient’s overall
burden of infection. IV immunoglobulins have been
shown to be beneficial in streptococcal toxic shock syndrome. If S. aureus is isolated from a patient and shown
to be methicillin susceptible, then nafcillin should be
substituted for vancomycin because it has superior antistaphylococcal activity.

References
Cosgrove SE, Zaleznik DF. Staphylococcal toxic shock syndrome.
UpToDate Online 13.3. Available at: www.uptodate.com. Accessed
November 16, 2005.
Issa N, Thompson R. Staphylococcal toxic shock syndrome. Postgrad
Med 2001;110:55–56, 59–62.
Mandel GL, Donglas RG, Bennett JE, Dolan R, eds. Principles and
Practice of Infectious Diseases, 6th ed. New York: Elsevier, 2005.
Stevens DL. Streptococcal toxic shock syndrome. UpToDate Online 13.3.
www.uptodate.com. Accessed November 16, 2005.

