TRANSIENT MONOCULAR VISUAL LOSS

Transient monocular blindness (TMB) is a medical emergency. The most common etiologies include embolic
disease, hemodynamic changes, primary ocular pathology,
or primary neurologic disease other than vascular compromise. If the temporary visual loss is caused by vascular
ischemia, whether from embolic disease or hemodynamic
changes, it is commonly called amaurosis fugax (AF).
A. Embolic disease: AF typically is described as impairment of vision that begins in the upper field of vision of
one eye and progresses to involve the entire visual field
of that eye. It usually lasts seconds to minutes. AF may
stop with a hemifield loss, ascend, or rarely progress
across the visual field laterally. Repeat episodes of AF
tend to follow a stereotypical pattern for each patient.
Of emboli, 50% are cholesterol plaques, most often
originating from the ipsilateral carotid bifurcation or
from the distal internal carotid artery. Funduscopy
rarely, but diagnostically, reveals a glistening yellow or
white object within the retinal vessel (Hollenhorst
plaque). Of emboli, 4% may contain fibrin clot and
originate from ulcerated vascular plaques or mural
cardiac thrombi. Pure calcific emboli are rare and arise
exclusively from cardiac valves. An episode of TMB is
an indication of increased risk of stroke similar to
a hemispheric transient ischemic attack (TIA). Of
patients with TMB, 11% later develop strokes; in 41%
of those, strokes occur within 1 week of the event.
In younger patients with history of trauma or neck
manipulations who present with TMB, embolic disease
or hypoperfusion state from carotid dissection needs to
be considered.
B. Temporal arteritis may cause blindness as a result of
thrombosis of the central retinal artery as a result of giant
cell arteritis. Patients are usually older and complain of
visual loss or changes in a setting of headache. They may
also have fever, anorexia, and weight loss. Leukocytosis,
anemia, and elevated ESR are common. The disease
process is self-limited over a period of months. The risk
of permanent visual loss from temporal arteritis is approximately 35%, and timely evaluation and treatment

410

with high-dose steroids can prevent further visual loss,
although restoration of vision is rare.
Migraine may present with unilateral visual changes
and headache. Homonymous hemianopsia may be misinterpreted by the patient as a monocular loss of vision.
Retinal migraine, a rare diagnosis of exclusion that is
truly monocular, is presumed to be a vasospastic event.
Positive visual phenomena such as scintillating scotoma
or “white-outs” may be seen. Most patients with retinal
migraines respond well to calcium channel blockers.
In a young individual, transient unilateral loss of central vision associated with pain on eye movement and
headache is seen in acute retrobulbar optic neuritis—
either as a clinically isolated syndrome or as a manifestation of a known diagnosis of multiple sclerosis. Symptoms of optic neuritis tend to worsen with increased
body temperature (Uhthoff’s phenomenon). Inflammation and demyelination of the optic nerve are responsible for visual loss. High-dose IV steroids given once
daily for 3–5 days shorten the duration of symptoms but
seem to have little effect on the degree of visual recovery based on Optic Neuritis Treatment Trial data.
C. Vascular ocular diseases causing anterior ischemic optic neuropathy (AION), occlusion of the central retinal
vein, and malignant arterial hypertension sometimes
begin with attacks of TMB. AION involves infarction
of the anterior portion of the optic nerve that can be
visualized with direct ophthalmoscopy. It has recently
been described as a rare complication from use of
drugs for erectile dysfunction (the PDEF5 inhibitors).
Nonvascular causes of TMB include increased intraorbital pressure and congenital anomalies. Subacute
attacks of angle-closure glaucoma can present with
transient visual loss and should be considered especially if patients complain of halos around lights. This
symptom is a result of corneal edema resulting from
rapid elevation of intraorbital pressure. Papilledema
from any cause can present with visual obscurations.
These disorders can be identified with the aid of a
careful ophthalmologic examination showing abnormal
ocular findings with a normal retina.
(Continued on page 412)

411
Patient with TRANSIENT MONOCULAR VISUAL LOSS

B Headache

A No headache

Ophthalmologic
examination

Ophthalmologic
examination

Retinal disease
or
Normal ophthalmologic
examination
Cont’d on p 413

C Ocular disease:

Nonvascular causes
(hemorrhage,
pressure, tumor,
congenital)
Papilledema from
malignant arterial
hypertension
Optic neuritis
Glaucoma
Anterior ischemic
optic neuropathy

Laboratory tests:
CBC, differential,
and platelets
Westergren ESR

ESR elevated

ESR normal

Presumed
temporal
arteritis

Migraine
Occipital seizure

Temporal Artery Biopsy
High-Dose Steroids

412
D. Laboratory evaluation of patients with a history of
transient monocular visual loss includes CBC, differential, and platelet count (e.g., for polycythemia, leukemia, thrombocytosis), ESR (e.g., for evidence of arteritis—giant cell or Takayasu’s), fasting blood glucose
(diabetes mellitus), prothrombin and partial thromboplastin times (if prolonged, check antiphospholipid
antibodies), and lipid profile (hyperlipidemia).
E. Noninvasive vascular studies include duplex (B mode
and Doppler) ultrasonography, transcranial Doppler,
and ophthalmodynamometry. Identification of the
percent stenosis and plaque characteristics helps to
inform the need for further, possibly more invasive,
evaluation. Ipsilateral carotid artery stenosis !70%
(severe) in the setting of TMB indicates the need for
carotid endarterectomy. Surgical intervention was
shown to be superior to medical treatment for symptomatic high-grade stenosis in a multicenter randomized trial. Benefits of surgical versus medical treatment
in patients with ipsilateral carotid stenoses of 30%–69%
(moderate) who have had an ischemic event (stroke,
TIA, TMB) are questionable. Antiplatelet and hydroxymethyl glutaryl coenzyme A HMG-CoA reductase
inhibitors (statins) can be used in combination for
maximum antiplatelet aggregation effects. Patients with
chronic, complete occlusion of the internal carotid artery should be prescribed maximal antiplatelet therapy.

Anticoagulants can be used in the setting of symptomatic acute occlusion of carotid artery while a decision
about surgical treatment or interventional radiology
treatment is made.
F. Transcranial Doppler studies can provide further information about intracranial stenosis in patients in
whom cerebral CT angiogram is not performed. MRI
scans can reveal “clinically silent” cerebral infarctions
or nonvascular lesions. Cardiac evaluation is important in the evaluation of a potential embolic source.
Transthoracic or transesophageal echocardiography is
performed to assess for potential sources of cardiac
emboli, patent foramen ovale, or low cardiac output
that occasionally can cause TMB through hypoperfusion mechanism, particularly with concomitant severe
ipsilateral carotid disease.

References
Feinberg AW. Recognition and significance of amaurosis fugax. Heart Dis
Stroke 1993;2:382.
Laskowitz D, Liu GT, Galetta SL. Acute visual loss and other disorders of
the eyes. Neurol Clin 1998;16:323–353.
Liu GT. Disorders of the eyes and eyelids. In Samuels MA, Feske SK,
eds. Office Practice of Neurology. Philadelphia: Churchill-Livingstone, 2003:35–68.
Miller NR. Walsh and Hoyt’s Clinical Neuro-ophthalmology, 5th ed.
Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 2004.

413
Retinal disease
or
Normal ophthalmologic
examination
(Cont’d from p 411)

D Laboratory tests
E Noninvasive studies:

CT or MRI of head
Carotid duplex
ultrasonography

"30%
stenosis

30%– 69%
stenosis

!70% stenosis

Ulcerated
plaque

Possible
occlusion

F Normal
Cardiac
evaluation

Arteriography

Total
occlusion

Medical Therapy:
Modification of
Risk Factors
Antiplatelet Therapy

!70%
ipsilateral
stenosis
SURGICAL THERAPY:
IPSILATERAL
CAROTID
ENDARTERECTOMY

