TRANSFUSION THERAPY: GRANULOCYTES
Richard M. Kaufman, MD

Granulocyte transfusions are sometimes considered for
patients with severe neutropenia (absolute neutrophil
count [ANC] !500/"l) and a life-threatening bacterial or
fungal infection. Cases where granulocyte transfusions are
considered are ones in which the patient’s own neutrophil counts are expected to recover within a few weeks
(e.g., following a chemotherapy-induced nadir). Despite
being used for #40 years, the efficacy of granulocyte
transfusions remains unclear. Indeed, a multicenter randomized controlled trial of standard antimicrobial therapy,
high-dose granulocyte transfusion has recently been proposed to attempt to definitively settle the question of what
(if any) role granulocytes have in treating neutropenic
sepsis. In the 1970s and early 1980s, seven randomized
controlled studies were performed to assess the efficacy
of granulocytes. Three trials reported positive results, two
trials reported partial positive results, and two trials reported negative results. All these studies were criticized
for several reasons, including administration of insufficient
granulocyte doses, small patient sample sizes, and excessively high mortality rates observed among the control
patients. In the mid-1980s, granulocyte transfusion use fell
sharply because the clinical results seen were marginal,
there was concern over adverse reactions, and there were
marked improvements in antimicrobial agents. Interest in
granulocyte transfusions was renewed in the 1990s, when
the introduction of recombinant granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) permitted the collection of extremely
high doses of granulocytes.

References

A. Granulocytes are collected by apheresis from healthy
donors, either volunteer community apheresis platelet
donors, or friends or family members of the patient. To
increase the granulocyte yield, donors may be mobilized with a single dose of G-CSF approximately
12 hours before granulocyte collection. G-CSF mobilization permits the harvest of 4–8 $ 1010 granulocytes.
Corticosteroids (e.g., oral dexamethasone) have been
shown to increase the granulocyte yield even further.
In general, granulocyte mobilization of donors has
been reported to be well tolerated, but there are

Hübel K, Carter RA, Liles WC, et al. Granulocyte transfusion therapy for
infections in candidates and recipients of HPC transplantation: a comparative analysis of feasibility and outcome for community donors
versus related donors. Transfusion 2002;42(11):1414–1421.
Price TH. Granulocyte transfusion therapy: it’s time for an answer. Transfusion 2006;46(1):1–5.
Price TH, Bowden RA, Boeckh M, et al. Phase I/II trial of neutrophil
transfusions from donors stimulated with G-CSF and dexamethasone
for treatment of patients with infections in hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation. Blood 2000;95(11):3302–3309.
Strauss RG. Therapeutic granulocyte transfusions in 1993. Blood
1993;81(7):1675–1678.
Vamvakas EC, Pineda AA. Meta-analysis of clinical studies of the efficacy of
granulocyte transfusions in the treatment of bacterial sepsis. J Clin Apher
1996;11(1):1–9.

254

known risks associated with both G-CSF and corticosteroid administration.
B. Granulocyte products are stored at room temperature
and must be transfused within 24 hours of collection.
Because granulocyte products may contain 40–50 ml
of RBCs, they must be ABO compatible with the recipient. All granulocyte products must be irradiated to
prevent transfusion-associated graft-versus-host disease. Generally, patients who are negative for cytomegalovirus (CMV) only receive granulocytes from
donors who are CMV negative.
C. Adverse reactions to granulocytes are seen in about
10% of granulocyte transfusions. Typical reactions are
fever/chills or mild allergic reactions (itching/hives).
More rarely, serious reactions are seen, such as anaphylaxis or acute lung injury. Hypoxic reactions have
been reported to be associated with the administration
of amphotericin, so granulocyte transfusions are typically given several hours apart from doses of amphotericin. Finally, granulocyte products carry the same
infectious risks of other blood products. Because granulocytes must be given within 24 hours of collection,
infectious disease testing is not available prior to the
time of administration. Ordinarily, the granulocyte
donor is tested and documented to be negative for all
standard infectious disease markers up to 30 days
ahead of the granulocyte donation.

255
GRANULOCYTE TRANSFUSION Considered
May be considered in patient with ANC
!500/"l and life-threatening infection
unresponsive to conventional therapy

A

Request blood bank to:
Mobilize donor
Collect product

B Transfuse within 24 hr
C Adverse events may include:
Fever/chills
Allergic reactions
Acute lung injury
Disease transmission

