TRANSFUSION THERAPY: FRESH FROZEN
PLASMA AND CRYOPRECIPITATE
Richard M. Kaufman, MD

Plasma is prepared from whole blood donations by centrifugation or is collected by apheresis. By definition,
fresh frozen plasma (FFP) is frozen within 6–8 hours of
collection and is stored at –18° C or colder. Each unit of
FFP has a volume of approximately 250 ml. FFP contains all of the coagulation factors at normal physiologic
levels. The primary use of FFP is to replace coagulation factors in patients with documented coagulopathy
(prothrombin time [PT] and/or activated partial thromboplastin time [aPTT] !1.5 times normal) who are
bleeding or undergoing an invasive procedure. Dosing
is by patient weight (10–20 ml/kg). A discussion of the
indications for FFP follows.
A. Vitamin K Deficiency/Warfarin Reversal: Vitamin K is
required for the "-carboxylation of coagulation factors II,
VII, IX, and X, as well as the anticoagulant proteins C
and S. This carboxylation step is critical for the normal
activity of these proteins. Warfarin (Coumadin) exerts its
anticoagulant effect by rendering patients functionally
vitamin K deficient. There are several ways to reverse
the effect of warfarin: (1) discontinue warfarin and
wait—complete reversal of the coagulopathy will occur
within 48 hours; (2) administer vitamin K—reversal
occurs in about 12 hours; (3) infuse FFP—a single FFP
infusion of 10–20 ml/kg will generally correct hemostasis
immediately.
B. Liver Disease: The liver produces all coagulation factors except factor VIII. Thus liver disease, regardless
of etiology, is often associated with multiple coagulation-factor deficiencies. Several additional features
of liver disease may increase the tendency to bleed,
including portal hypertension, decreased clearance
of activated coagulation complexes, dysfibrinogenemia, and splenomegaly with associated thrombocytopenia. The PT is prolonged to a greater extent than
the aPTT; this is due to the short half-life of factor
VII (4–6 hours). Because factor VII has such a short
half-life, it is rarely possible to infuse a large enough
volume of FFP to correct the patient’s PT entirely to
normal. However, it should be emphasized that a
completely normal PT is not required for hemostasis
to be achieved.

248

C. Isolated Coagulation Factor Deficiency: FFP carries
the same risks of pathogen transmission as other blood
products, so FFP is never given in cases where a specific factor concentrate is available (e.g., factor VIII for
hemophilia A). Currently FFP is the only product
available for inherited or acquired deficiencies of
factors II, V, X, and XI.
D. Dilutional Coagulopathy: In cases where bleeding
patients receive a large volume of RBCs cells and colloid replacement, there may be sufficient dilution of
endogenous coagulation factors to impair hemostasis.
FFP may be indicated if the patient’s PT and/or aPTT
are prolonged to !1.5 times the mean of normal.
E. Other Conditions: Plasma infusion may be beneficial in
DIC for patients with a prolonged PT and aPTT who
are bleeding, undergoing an invasive procedure, or
both. Plasma exchange with plasma replacement is the
mainstay of therapy for thrombotic thrombocytopenic
purpura (TTP). Finally, plasma is used to treat C1esterase deficiency (hereditary angioedema).
F. Cryoprecipitate (CRYO) is prepared by thawing FFP at
4° C and collecting and refreezing the insoluble fraction.
Each unit of CRYO has a volume of 10–15 ml and contains an average of 250 mg of fibrinogen. The usual dose
is a pool of 10 U. CRYO is indicated for patients who are
bleeding and have a fibrinogen level #100 mg/dl (e.g.,
DIC). In the past, CRYO was used to treat von
Willebrand’s disease; it is no longer used in this setting
because of the availability of factor VIII concentrates
that contain high levels of von Willebrand’s factor.

References
Brecher, ME, ed. Technical Manual. Bethesda, MD: AABB, 2005.
Fresh-Frozen Plasma, Cryoprecipitate, and Platelets Administration
Practice Guidelines Development Task Force of the College of
American Pathologists. Practice parameter for the use of freshfrozen plasma, cryoprecipitate, and platelets. JAMA 1994;271(10):
777–781.
McVay PA, Toy PT. Lack of increased bleeding after liver biopsy in patients
with mild hemostatic abnormalities. Am J Clin Pathol 1990;94(6):
747–753.
Segal JB, Dzik WH. Paucity of studies to support that abnormal coagulation test results predict bleeding in the setting of invasive procedures: an evidence-based review. Transfusion 2005;45(9):1413–1425.

249
Patient for FRESH FROZEN PLATELETS and CRYOPRECIPITATE

B Liver disease
A Vitamin K deficiency
Warfarin reversal

48 hr available

12 hr available

Stop Warfarin

Give Vitamin K

D Dilutional

F Fibrinogen

coagulopathy

C Isolated factor
deficiency

Immediate reversal
Infuse FFP
Also Give IV Vitamin K
Consider Prothrombin Complex
Concentration as an Alternative

deficiency

E Other:

DIC
TTP
C1-esterase
deficiency

Transfuse CRYO

