TRANSFUSION REACTIONS
Richard M. Kaufman, MD

In past decades, three viruses comprised the most important infectious risks of transfusion: hepatitis B virus (HBV),
hepatitis C virus (HCV), and HIV. In the United States,
improvements in donor screening (e.g., nucleic acid testing) have all but eliminated transfusion transmission of
HIV and HCV. The per unit risks are now approximately
1 in 2 million for HIV and HCV and 1 in 200,000 for HBV.
With the rates of HIV, HCV, and HBV transmission having
dropped so low, other transfusion risks have gained new
prominence. The most significant infectious risk of transfusion is now sepsis from a bacterially contaminated platelet
unit. Platelets (PLTs) must be stored at room temperature. Bacteria can be cultured from about 1 in 3000 PLT
units, and a clinically significant septic reaction is thought
to occur in about 1 in 20,000 PLT transfusions. The other
most important current risks of transfusion are as follows:
(1) transfusion-related acute lung injury (per unit risk
of 1/5000) and (2) transfusion of the wrong RBC unit, typically resulting from a patient identification error (per unit
risk of 1/12,000 to 1/19,000).
A. In general, any adverse clinical event that occurs during a blood transfusion should be considered a transfusion reaction until proved otherwise. Steps to take
when a transfusion reaction is suspected include the
following: (1) stop the transfusion and notify the blood
bank; (2) reconfirm the identity of the patient and unit
immediately; (3) draw a fresh blood sample, and send
it plus the remaining blood component to the blood
bank. The blood bank will perform a clerical check,
examine the recipient’s plasma for visible hemolysis,
and perform a direct antiglobulin test (DAT) to look
for antibody-coated red cells in the recipient.
B. Acute hemolytic transfusion reactions occur when preformed antibodies in the recipient bind to transfused
RBCs. The classic example is an ABO-incompatible
transfusion (e.g., A donor/O recipient). The antibodyantigen interaction can lead to complement fixation,
cytokine effects, renal failure, and DIC. Fever is the
most common sign. Other signs and symptoms may
include rigors; pain at the infusion site or in the chest,
abdomen, or flanks; nausea/vomiting; and shock. In
anesthetized patients, red urine may be the only presenting sign. The transfusion should be stopped immediately. Blood pressure support and maintaining adequate

256

C.

D.

E.

F.

renal perfusion are primary concerns. Patients should
be hydrated with normal saline ± diuretics.
Delayed hemolytic transfusion reactions are anamnestic
anti-RBC antibody responses that occur 1–2 weeks
posttransfusion. Patients are often asymptomatic. Decreased survival of transfused RBCs may be suspected
based on a falling hemoglobin/hematocrit level and an
increased bilirubin. The DAT is usually positive. Treatment is supportive; the patient’s CBC and renal status
should be monitored.
Febrile nonhemolytic transfusion reactions (FNHTRs)
are generally defined as a temperature increase of at
least 1° C in the setting of transfusion, for which no
other cause can be established. These reactions are
typically benign, but other, more serious causes of fever must be excluded (i.e., hemolytic and septic reactions). Proposed mechanisms of FNHTR include (1)
recipient antibody interacting with transfused leukocytes and (2) transfusion of cytokines that have accumulated during storage. The use of prestorage leukoreduced blood products has decreased the incidence
of FNHTRs. These reactions generally respond well to
acetaminophen administration.
Allergic transfusion reactions are caused by allergies to
donor plasma proteins. Allergic reactions to blood
products span the entire spectrum from mild urticarial
reactions to full-blown anaphylaxis. For reactions
limited to urticaria only (i.e., no bronchospasm or hypotension) it is acceptable to stop the transfusion, treat
with antihistamines, and restart the infusion if the
symptoms resolve. Epinephrine is the mainstay of
treatment for anaphylactic transfusion reactions.
Transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI) is
characterized by acute-onset hypoxemia and the appearance of bilateral infiltrates on chest x-ray within
6 hours of transfusion of a plasma-containing component. The acute respiratory distress syndrome seen is
noncardiogenic in nature but may be difficult to distinguish from circulatory overload. Multiple mechanisms
for TRALI have been proposed. In at least a subset of
cases, TRALI is precipitated by passive transfusion
of donor antibodies (usually anti–human leukocyte
antigen) that react with recipient cells. Care is supportive. All patients with TRALI require supplemental
oxygen, and about 75% need mechanical ventilatory

257
Patient with TRANSFUSION REACTIONS

A Stop transfusion, notify blood bank

Reconfirm patient identity, check unit ID
Fresh sample plus remaining unit to blood bank

DAT positive
Visible hemolysis

DAT negative
No visible hemolysis

B Acute hemolytic

Hemolytic reaction
excluded

transfusion reaction

C If !24 hr after transfusion,
delayed hemolytic
transfusion reaction

Maintain BP and renal perfusion
IVF " diuretics

E Allergic reaction

Fever present

Sepsis (usually
from platelet unit)
Blood culturing
Empiric antibiotics

No sepsis

D Febrile nonhemolytic

Mild
Antihistamines

reaction

F TRALI

Anaphylaxis
Epinephrine
Steroids
Antihistamines

Acute hypoxemia,
bilateral lung
infiltrates, no congestive
heart failure

G TA-GVHD
Prevent with
irradiated blood
products

Supportive care
Request workup
by blood bank

Acetaminophen
Leukoreduced blood
products if recurrent
reaction

support. Although most patients with TRALI recover
spontaneously over 2–4 days, there is a 5%–10%
mortality rate.
G. Transfusion-associated graft-versus-host disease (TAGVHD) is a rare but devastating complication of blood
transfusion that primarily affects recipients who are
immunocompromised. Viable lymphocytes in the transfused blood component attack host tissues, leading to
severe rash, diarrhea, and pancytopenia within 7–10 days
of transfusion. TA-GVHD is almost uniformly fatal.
There is no treatment, but TA-GVHD can be prevented
effectively by providing irradiated blood products.

References
Brecher ME, ed. Technical Manual. Bethesda, MD: AABB, 2005.
Dodd RY, Notari EP 4th, Stramer SL. Current prevalence and incidence
of infectious disease markers and estimated window-period risk in the
American Red Cross blood donor population. Transfusion 2002;
42(8):975–979.
Hillyer CD, Josephson CD, Blajchman MA, et al. Bacterial contamination of blood components: risks, strategies, and regulation: Joint ASH
and AABB educational session in transfusion medicine. Hematology
Am Soc Hematol Educ Program 2003:575–589.
Linden JV, Wagner K, Voytovich AE, et al. Transfusion errors in New
York State: an analysis of 10 years’ experience. Transfusion 2000;
40(10):1207–1213.
Toy P, Popovsky MA, Abraham E, et al. Transfusion-related acute lung
injury: definition and review. Crit Care Med 2005;33(4):721–726.

