TRANSFUSION THERAPY: RED BLOOD CELLS
Richard M. Kaufman, MD

RBCs are transfused to increase oxygen-carrying capacity
to meet tissue demands. The clinical significance of anemia
varies widely, depending on the underlying cause, the time
course, and the patient’s volume status and clinical condition.
Thus RBC transfusion decisions can be complex, and it is
inappropriate to rely solely on a hemoglobin (Hgb) trigger.
Rather, the risks and benefits of transfusion should be considered on an individual case basis. The patient’s clinical status
needs to be assessed carefully. Signs and symptoms of anemia
(e.g., fatigue, lightheadedness, pallor, tachycardia, dyspnea
on exertion) should be sought.
RBC units are derived from whole blood donations,
after removal of most of the plasma, which is used for the
production of fresh frozen plasma (FFP) and/or platelet
concentrates. RBCs may also be collected by apheresis.
RBCs are stored at 1°–6° C and have a maximum shelf
life of 42 days. A unit of RBCs has a volume of about
250–300 ml and is expected to increase the recipient’s
Hgb by approximately 1 g/dl or hematocrit by 3%.
A. Because of normal physiologic compensation mechanisms (e.g., increased cardiac output, increased oxygen
extraction), anemia may be surprisingly well tolerated,
particularly when subacute in onset. For patients with
normovolemic anemia caused by a nutritional deficiency, transfusion frequently can be avoided. Instead,
the appropriate pharmacologic therapy (i.e., iron, folate,
or vitamin B12) should be administered.
B. For patients with severe acute hemorrhage, initial
efforts should be focused on preventing hypovolemic
shock. Volume resuscitation with crystalloid or colloid
solution is of greater immediate importance than restoring oxygen-carrying capacity.
C. A number of RBC transfusion guidelines have been published. In general, it has been suggested that transfusion
is almost never indicated with a Hgb level !10 g/dl and
is often needed for a Hgb level "6–7 g/dl. Clinical judgment is required for patients with Hgb levels between
6–7 g/dl and 10 g/dl.
D. A particularly valuable study of RBC transfusion was
the Transfusion Requirements in Critical Care (TRICC)
study, published in 1999. This was a well-designed
randomized controlled trial of RBC transfusion in the
intensive care setting. Almost 850 patients with anemia

252

who were in the intensive care unit were randomly
assigned to either a liberal or a restrictive transfusion
strategy. Patients in the liberal group were transfused
for a Hgb level "10 g/dl and were maintained with
Hgb concentrations of 10–12 g/dl. Patients in the restrictive group were transfused for a Hgb level "7 g/dl
and were maintained at hemoglobin levels of 7–9 g/dl.
The primary end point, overall 30-day mortality, was
similar in the two groups. Mortality during hospitalization was significantly lower in the restrictive group. A
reanalysis of the data did reveal a trend (not statistically significant) toward higher mortality among patients in the restrictive group with acute myocardial
infarction and unstable angina.
E. Commonly used modifications to RBC products
include leukoreduction, irradiation, and washing. Leukoreduction removes !99% of contaminating WBCs
and helps prevent febrile nonhemolytic transfusion
reactions, human leukocyte antigen (HLA) alloimmunization, and cytomegalovirus (CMV) transmission.
Leukoreduction has additionally been proposed to
prevent transfusion-associated immunosuppression,
but the data are currently unclear. Irradiation is currently the only approved means to prevent transfusionassociated graft-versus-host disease (TA-GVHD).
Washing RBCs is done to remove plasma proteins; this
is indicated when the recipient has a history of severe
allergic reactions that are refractory to antihistamine
administration.

References
Consensus Conference. Perioperative red blood cell transfusion. JAMA
1988;260(18):2700–2703.
Hébert PC, Wells G, Blajchman MA, et al. A multicenter, randomized,
controlled clinical trial of transfusion requirements in critical care.
Transfusion Requirements in Critical Care Investigators, Canadian
Critical Care Trials Group. N Engl J Med 1999;340(6):409–417.
Hébert PC, Yetisir E, Martin C, et al. Is a low transfusion threshold safe
in critically ill patients with cardiovascular diseases? Crit Care Med
2001;29(2):227–234.
Simon TL, Alverson DC, AuBouchon J, et al. Practice parameter for the
use of red blood cell transfusions: developed by the Red Blood Cell
Administration Practice Guideline Development Task Force of the
College of American Pathologists. Arch Pathol Lab Med
1998;122(2):130–138.

253
RED BLOOD CELL TRANSFUSION Considered

A Normovolemic anemia

Other anemias

caused by nutritional
deficiency

B Hemorrhage
Restore volume
with crystalloid

Pharmacologic therapy
(e.g., iron)
Avoid transfusion if possible

Evaluate clinical status
Look for signs and symptoms of:
Anemia
Fatigue
Lightheadedness
Pallor
Tachycardia
Dyspnea on exertion

C Check Hgb: "7 g/dl
D RBC transfusion usually

needed (higher Hgb may
be appropriate in cardiac
disease)
Transfuse RBCs

E Leukoreduction

prevents febrile
reactions, HLA
alloimmunization,
CMV transmission

Irradiation
prevents
TA-GVHD

Washing only if
history of severe
allergic reactions

