TRANSIENT ISCHEMIC ATTACK AND STROKE EVALUATION


Transient ischemic attacks (TIAs) are classically defined
as brief episodes of focal neurologic deficits, usually lasting !24 hours and affecting cerebral blood flow. They are
generally thought not to cause permanent damage to the
brain. However, TIAs lasting more than 1 hour are associated with brain tissue damage in up to 50% of all cases.
Although the definition remains controversial, TIAs continue to be an important indicator and prognosticator
of cerebrovascular and cardiovascular disease. Because
the risk of stroke can be as high as 20% within the first
3 months after a TIA and about 5% within 48 hours, early
workup to identify the specific etiology and prompt intervention are crucial for stroke prophylaxis.
A. Focal neurologic deficits occur in a number of conditions
other than vascular ischemic events. Vascular events
have an abrupt onset; the maximal effect is usually seen
within minutes. The subacute development of focal neurologic deficits is typically seen in conditions such as
subdural hematoma, demyelinating disorders, brain
abscesses, mass lesions, and venous sinus thrombosis.
Occasionally, these pathologies present with transient
deficits, but more commonly persistent abnormalities
remain. A focal seizure or migraine may present with
transient focal neurologic deficits but is usually accompanied by other symptoms. Involuntary movements, loss of
consciousness, incontinence, or confusion suggests a
seizure. Visual scintillations or headache may accompany
transient episodes in patients with migraine.
B. The primary cause of TIAs is neural tissue ischemia from
lack of blood flow. Ischemic etiologies of TIA include
large vessel (e.g., carotid or vertebral-basilar stenosis),
small vessel (e.g., hypertensive lacunar infarcts), embolic
(e.g., cardiac, artery-to-artery, or paradoxical emboli via
patent foramen ovale), and other (e.g., trauma-related
dissection, vasculitis). The workup to determine the specific pathophysiologic mechanism underlying a TIA is
crucial because treatment options differ.
C. The pattern of neurologic deficits indicates the vascular territory involved. Carotid artery ischemia (anterior circulation) can cause blindness (amaurosis fugax)
on the ipsilateral (same side) of the affected artery and
weakness or sensory loss on the contralateral face,
arm, and leg. Aphasia (trouble with speech), including

408

difficulty finding words or understanding others, may
be present. In the posterior circulation, ischemia involving the brainstem is common and may cause a
constellation of symptoms, including ataxia, dysarthria, diplopia, and facial weakness.
Neurologic evaluation of TIA should include imaging, laboratory, and/or cardiac workup, depending on
the clinical suspicion. CT scan of the brain can help to
rule out hemorrhage. Carotid duplex ultrasonography,
including B-mode and Doppler evaluation of the extracranial carotid system, is a good screening tool to assess
the degree of stenosis present and the plaque characteristics. Ultrasonography is also a noninvasive method
for follow-up evaluation. If surgery is considered, the
patient may need a CT cerebral angiogram or conventional arteriography to provide an accurate assessment
of the degree of extracranial stenosis and amount of
intracranial vascular disease.
D. Vertebrobasilar TIAs (posterior circulation), which can
more easily be missed, may involve a combination of
gait or balance problems (ataxia), double vision (diplopia), vertigo, slurred speech (dysarthria), binocular
blindness, swallowing difficulty (dysphagia), sleepiness,
and varying patterns of limb weakness.
When TIAs involve the vertebrobasilar system,
MRI is the imaging method of choice. A CT scan of
the region may be less revealing because of bony artifacts in the neck region. Therefore, MRI gives a more
detailed view of the cerebellum and brainstem.
For both anterior and posterior circulation TIA
workup, laboratory evaluation includes CBC (differential, platelet count), prothrombin and activated partial
thromboplastin times, ESR, fasting glucose, electrolytes, liver and kidney function, lipid profile, and urinalysis. Cardiac evaluation includes chest film and
ECG. If these are abnormal or if there is clinical evidence of cardiac disease, echocardiography and/or a
Holter monitor may identify thrombi or arrhythmias.
E. In patients !45 years old, consider toxic screen, attention to history of trauma to look for carotid/vertebral
dissection, transthoracic echo with bubble study to
look for patent foramen ovale, or hypercoagulable
panel (especially in women taking oral contraceptives
to look for venous disease).

409
Patient with suspected TRANSIENT ISCHEMIC ATTACK

A Focal neurologic
deficit

Sudden onset

! 24 hour

B Transient focal

ischemia (TIA)
Ischemia
Large vessel
Small vessel
Embolic
Other (trauma/
dissector vasculitis)

D Posterior circulation

(vertebrobasilar TIA)

MRA or CTA (if MRI
not available)
Hematologic screen
Cardiac evaluation
Assess risk factors
Compare blood pressure
in both arms

Subacute onset

"24 hour
(not a TIA
by definition)
Consider:
Focal
seizure
Complicated
migraine
Hypoglycemic
hemiplegia

Consider:
Stroke
Tumor
Other mass
lesion

Consider:
Subdural hematoma
Brain abscess
Brain tumor/mass
Demyelinating
disease
Encephalitis
Venous sinus thrombosis

C Anterior circulation
(carotid TIA)

CT of head
Hematologic screen
Assess risk factors
Noninvasive carotid
artery evaluation
Duplex carotid
ultrasonography
Angiography (CTA or MRA)
Cardiac evaluation

E Young patients (in addition to above workup):
Toxic screen
Trauma (dissection)
Patent foramen ovale (PFO)
Hypercoagulable panel

Management
(see Stroke Treatment
and Prophylaxis)

References
Albers GW, Amarenco P, Easton JD, et al. Antithrombotic and thrombolytic therapy for ischemic stroke: the Seventh ACCP Conference on
Antithrombotic and Thrombolytic Therapy. Chest 2004;126:483S.
Albers GW, Caplan LR, Easton JD, et al. Transient ischemic attack—
proposal for a new definition. N Engl J Med 2002;347:1713.
Caplan LR. TIAs: we need to return to the question, “What is wrong with
Mr Jones?” (editorial). Neurology 1988;38:791.

CAPRIE Steering Committee. A randomised, blinded trial of clopidogrel
versus aspirin in patients at risk of ischaemic events (CAPRIE). Lancet 1996;348:1329.
Fisher M. Occlusion of the internal carotid artery. AMA Arch Neurol
Psychiatry 1951;65:346.
Johnston SC, Gress DR, Browner WS, et al. Short-term prognosis after
emergency department diagnosis of TIA. JAMA 2000;284:2901.
Kidwell CS, Alger JR, Di Salle F, et al. Diffusion MRI in patients with
transient ischemic attacks. Stroke 1999;30:1174.

