UNSTABLE ANGINA/NON-ST-ELEVATION MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION

Unstable angina (UA) and non-ST-elevation myocardial
infarctions (NSTEMI) most commonly arise from nearly
complete but not total occlusion of a coronary artery with
a platelet- and fibrin-rich thrombus. Patients presenting
with UA/NSTEMI represent a heterogeneous population,
with the rate of death and recurrent myocardial infarction
at 1 year ranging from !5% in patients at low risk to "20%
in the patients at highest risk. The therapeutic options for
patients with UA/NSTEMI have continued to increase to
include more varied and potent antiplatelet and antithrombotic agents and improved percutaneous coronary interventional techniques. Thus, the clinician has many treatment options available and must effectively discriminate
which patients are likely to benefit from the most aggressive treatment while balancing the risk of potential side effects or complications in those at lower risk. Effective risk
stratification is critical to making appropriate decisions for
therapeutic care.
A. The decision to hospitalize a patient with ischemic
symptoms relies on a careful history, physical examination, a resting 12-lead ECG, and laboratory test for
cardiac biomarkers (creatine kinase-MB [CKMB] or
cardiac-specific troponins). Patients with intermediate
to high likelihood of true ischemic disease should be
hospitalized, whereas those without any of these features may be evaluated in an observation unit or as an
outpatient.
B. Determining appropriate therapy for each patient
admitted with presumed UA/NSTEMI requires an
assessment of their clinical risk of recurrent ischemic
events and death. Three easily obtained indicators of
high risk for recurrent ischemic events—elevated levels
of cardiac biomarkers (e.g., troponin), ST-segment deviation, and high clinical risk scores—identify those patients
who are at highest risk and warrant the most aggressive
medical and invasive therapy. One widely used clinical
risk score is the TIMI Risk Score, which incorporates
seven easily obtained clinical characteristics.
C. Patients with no ECG changes, normal levels of cardiac
biomarkers, and low clinical risk factors can be managed
conservatively with aspirin, heparin (unfractionated or

68

low molecular weight heparin [UFH/LMWH]), beta
blockers, clopidogrel, and nitrates as needed. If they do
not develop recurrent ischemia or other clinical instability, they should undergo a stress test for further risk
stratification.
D. Clinical trial evidence supports the use of more aggressive medical and invasive therapy in patients who are
found to be at increased risk for death or recurrent
ischemia. The benefit of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors and an early invasive catheterization has been
shown to be most beneficial in reducing both death and
recurrent MI in patients with positive cardiac biomarkers, ST-segment changes, or a TIMI Risk Score #3.
E. Any patient who has recurrent ischemia, hemodynamic
compromise or congestive heart failure (CHF), serious
ventricular arrhythmia, reduced left ventricular function
(ejection fraction !40%), or a strongly positive stress
test should be considered for catheterization regardless
of initial management strategy.
F. Long-term therapy for any patient with UA/NSTEMI
includes risk factor modification together with aspirin,
clopidogrel, beta blockers, high-dose statins, and
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors/
angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs).

References
Antithrombotic Trialists’ Collaboration. Collaborative meta-analysis of
randomised trials of antiplatelet therapy for prevention of death,
myocardial infarction, and stroke in high risk patients. BMJ 2002;324:
71–86.
Antman EM, Cohen M, Bernink PJ, et al. The TIMI risk score for
unstable angina/non-ST elevation MI: a method for prognostication
and therapeutic decision making. JAMA 2000;284:835–842.
Braunwald E, Antman EM, Beasley JW, et al. ACC/AHA 2002 guideline
update for the management of patients with unstable angina and
non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction—summary article.
A report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Committee on the
Management of Patients with Unstable Angina). J Am Coll Cardiol
2002;40:1366–1374.
Cannon CP, Weintraub WS, Demopoulos LA, et al. Comparison of early
invasive and conservative strategies in patients with unstable coronary
syndromes treated with the glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor tirofiban
(TACTICS-TIMI 18). N Engl J Med 2001;344:1879–1887.

69
Patient with UNSTABLE ANGINA
History
Physical examination

12-lead ECG
Cardiac biomarkers

A Likelihood of UA/NSTEMI

High likelihood
Typical angina
Known history of CAD or MI
CHF
New ECG changes
Positive CKMB or troponin

Intermediate likelihood
Probable angina
Age "70 yr
Diabetes
History of PVD or
cerebrovascular accident
Old ECG changes

Hospitalize

Low likelihood
Atypical angina
Reproducible
No cardiac risk factors
Normal ECG
Evaluate as outpatient

Aspirin
Risk Factor Modification
Stress Test

Aspirin
Heparin (UFH/LMWH)
Clopidogrel
Beta Blockers
Nitrates
Statins

B Risk stratify
D Moderate to high risk

Positive CKMB or troponin
ST-segment deviation
CHF
Recurrent ischemia
Prior revascularization
TIMI Risk Score #3
(One point for each)
Age "65 yr
#3 CAD risk factors
Aspirin within last 7 days
Known CAD
#2 anginal events in $24 hr
ST-segment deviation
Elevated biomarkers

Glycoprotein Ilb/Illa Inhibitor
Early Catheterization

CAD, Coronary artery disease.

C Low risk

Normal CKMB or troponin
No ECG changes
TIMI Risk Score ! 3

Predischarge Stress Test

E

Catheterization if:
Recurrent Ischemia
CHF
Positive ETT
Hemodynamic Instability
Serious Arrhythmia

F

Long-Term Care
Risk Factor Modification
Aspirin
Clopidogrel
Beta Blockers
High-Dose Statins
ACE Inhibitors/ARBs

