URINARY INCONTINENCE
Urinary incontinence is an important health problem and
affects 10 million patients to some degree. Approximately
50% of patients in nursing homes are affected by urinary
incontinence, and !$15–$20 billion is spent annually on
management of this problem. There are four types of urinary incontinence: stress, urge, overflow, and mixed.
When approaching a patient with questionable urinary
incontinence it is imperative to obtain a thorough history and
physical examination. Cystometry may help confirm your
clinical suspicion but is not absolute, especially if the urinary
symptoms are not reproduced during the study. Treatment
differs between each type of urinary incontinence; therefore,
it is imperative to make the correct diagnosis.
A. Stress incontinence results from an anatomic defect or
weakness in the pelvic floor that results in poor support
and hypermobility of the urethra. The sphincteric mechanism itself is intact (usually). The defect arises when
the bladder undergoes filling/storage and the intravesical pressure exceeds intraurethral pressure as a result of
excessive mobility of the urethra. The stages of stress
urinary incontinence ascend from I and II depending on
the degree of urethral hypermobility; stage III involves
an associated defect in the intrinsic sphincter.
Diagnosis starts with the history and physical examination with patients reporting urinary leakage on activities that results in increased intraabdominal pressure. Leakage tends to occur with coughing, sneezing,
and/or Valsalva. Information about routine past medical/surgical history, medications, and diet may be useful. As with most patients with urinary symptoms, we
recommend sending the serum for basic chemistry if
one is not on file and the urine for urinalysis and urine
culture to rule out any associated urinary tract infection. Physical examination is important to rule out any
associated cystocele, rectocele, or prolapse. Neurologic
examination also may be helpful. If there is continued
suspicion for stress incontinence, the patient should
undergo cystometry, which should include a cystogram
and urodynamic analysis. Cystometry will help look at
the anatomy and the physiology of both the urethra and
sphincteric mechanism.
Treatment for stress urinary incontinence is surgical
and is centered around restoring the normal integrity of
the pelvic floor support. This can be accomplished by
the Marshall-Marchetti-Krantz suprapubic approach
and the modified Burch procedure, which fixes the anterior vaginal wall to Cooper’s ligament. Other techniques include a variety of vaginal suspension procedures that tend to rely on sutures placed paravaginally,
568

which are secured in the suprapubic area and tied over
the rectus sheath. Sling procedures have become popular; they use either cadaveric tissues for support or,
most commonly, synthetic material. The sling procedures may be used with sphincter damage and combined cystocele repair, depending on the type of system
used. Of mention, another less invasive tool in patients
not suitable for surgery is the pessary.
B. True urge incontinence is defined as detrusor instability
with normal intrinsic sphincter function, no neuropathy,
and normal anatomy. As with stress incontinence, history and physical examination supported by cystometry
will help elucidate urge urinary incontinence. The patient usually reports inability to hold urine long enough
to void in an appropriate place on a repetitive basis. The
most common causes of urge incontinence include age,
inhibition of neurologic control of micturition (spinal
abnormality, stroke), and bladder irritation (infection,
inflammation, cancer, hematuria, stones). If urinalysis
shows microscopic hematuria, then an evaluation, which
should include urine cytology, imaging, and cystoscopy
to identify the source of bleeding, should be initiated.
Based on urodynamics and pressure/flow studies, one
may sometimes find uninhibited detrusor contractions
during bladder filling.
On the results of the urodynamic study, treatment
focuses on decreasing these uninhibited contractions,
most commonly with antimuscarinic agents. Side effects differ among different medications, and the physician and patient must tailor which medication and
dose provide the best symptomatic relief with the fewest side effects. The final treatment for urge incontinence may include surgery with either sacral nerve
modulation or augmentation cystoplasty.
C. Overflow incontinence is not true incontinence and usually results from an obstructive or neuropathic lesion. History and physical examination usually reveal impaired detrusor contraction, bladder outlet obstructive symptoms
(decreased force of stream, urgency, terminal dribbling),
or both, but also may reveal irritative symptoms (frequency, nocturia, dysuria). Uroflow and postvoid residual
will guide the suspicion for bladder outlet obstruction;
however, urodynamics will help confirm the diagnosis.
Treatment of the underlying cause of the obstruction
will treat the overall incontinence. For example, classically the patient will have an enlarged prostate, and
treatment for the enlarged prostate (type I alpha blocker
and type II 5-alpha reductase inhibitors) will help resolve the overflow incontinence. Agents that decrease
bladder contractility should be avoided.

569
Patient with URINARY INCONTINENCE

History, including volume of incontinence, pad usage
Clinical examination including pelvic examination
with stress maneuvers to elicit incontinence

B Urge

A Pure stress

incontinence

incontinence

Mild

D Mixed

C Overflow

incontinence

incontinence

Moderate-severe and
bothersome
Urodynamics

Conservative treatment

Vesicovaginal
sling surgery

Treatment
according to
findings

Urodynamics
Weight loss

Kegel exercises

Physical therapy

Kegel
exercises

Fluid
restriction

Anticholinergics

Bladder
training

Bladder outlet surgery
for obstruction
(e.g., TURP)

Foley catheter

Self-catheterization
teaching
TURP, Transurethral resection of the prostate.

D. Mixed incontinence often involves detrusor overactivity (urgency) associated with urethral hypermobility/
urethral intrinsic sphincter dysfunction (stress). History and physical examination supported by cystometry
will help elucidate the severity of mixed incontinence
and what is likely contributing to the overall incontinence. Treatment is based on the severity and type of
symptoms.

References
Abrams P, Cardozo L, Fall M, et al. The standardisation of terminology
of lower urinary tract function: Report from the Standardisation Subcommittee of the International Continence Society. Neurourol Urodyn 2002;21:167.

Burgio KL, Goode PS, Locher JL, et al. Behavioral training with and
without biofeedback in the treatment of urge incontinence in older
women: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2002;288:2293.
Diokno AC. Diagnostic categories of incontinence and the role of urodynamic testing. J Am Geriatr Soc 1990;38:300.
DuBeau CE. Interpreting the effect of common medical conditions
on voiding dysfunction in the elderly. Urol Clin North Am
1996;23:11.
Harris SS, Link CL, Tennstedt SL, et al. Care seeking and treatment
for urinary incontinence in a diverse population. J Urol
2007;177:680.
Resnick NM. Voiding dysfunction in the elderly. In Yalla SV, McGuire EJ,
Elbadawi A, et al, eds. Neurourology and urodynamics: principles and
practice. New York: MacMillan, 1984:303.
Sze EH, Jones WP, Ferguson JL, et al. Prevalence of urinary incontinence symptoms among black, white, and Hispanic women. Obstet
Gynecol 2002;99:572.
Taub DA, Hollenbeck BK, Wei JT, et al. Complications following surgical
intervention for stress urinary incontinence: a national perspective.
Neurourol Urodyn 2005;24:659.

