URINARY RETENTION


Acute urinary retention (AUR) is urinary retention that
develops in a rapid manner. Among urologic emergencies,
AUR is the most commonly encountered. The most frequent etiology is benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), and
the typical patient is !60 years. The typical clinical course
of BPH is progression over time. In men !70 years, approximately 1 in 10 will develop AUR over a 5-year period.
Increased life expectancy among men has resulted in a
similarly increased incidence of BPH and related disorders.
As a consequence, it is important for medical professionals to
become familiar with the risk factors/etiology associated with
and the initial management of AUR. Risk factors, acute management, and medical and surgical therapy will be reviewed.
Most commonly, retention of urine develops secondary to
an obstructive process. Obstructive pathology includes BPH,
malignancy, urethral stricture, urolithiasis, phimosis, and
paraphimosis. However, the use of medications, trauma,
neurologic disease, infection, and (infrequently) psychological pathology can be the source of urinary retention.
A great deal of research has focused on the identification of risk factors associated with the development of
urinary retention. The following factors are considered the
most well established.
• Age: Age !70 years carries a relative risk (RR) of 7.8
for the development of urinary retention.
• Symptom score: The American Urological Association
(AUA) symptom score is a method used to quantify
one’s symptoms. This questionnaire is easy to complete
and considers seven components (frequency, urgency,
nocturia, weak stream, intermittency of stream, straining to void, and incomplete emptying). Each component is scored from 0 to 5 (5 being the most severe).
A maximum score of 35 can be obtained. A score of
7 represents an RR of 3.2 for the development of urinary retention. Repeated administrations of this survey
can be used to follow progression over time.
• Prostate volume: Prostatic volumes !30 ml as measured
by transrectal ultrasound have been associated with an
RR of 3.0.
• Urinary flow rate: Urinary flow rate of "12 ml/sec carries an RR of 3.9.
A. AUR commonly presents with the inability to pass
urine and lower abdominal/suprapubic discomfort. Patients can present with notable distress. Conversely,
chronic urinary retention can develop over a substantial period of time with progressive obstruction or
bladder dysfunction. These patients are often less severely affected and are often without discomfort.
Patients with urinary retention often will present to
the emergency department or to the office of a primary
570

physician. Patients are unlikely to present initially to a
urologist, so it is imperative for health care professionals
to be familiar with the initial management.
The initial evaluation should focus on relevant medical and surgical history with particular attention to a history of prior episodes of retention, prior urologic surgery,
prior radiation, or trauma. Additional relevant information includes hematuria, dysuria, fever, back pain, and a
list of medications. The physical examination should focus on the following elements:
• Abdominal palpation: Palpation of the lower abdomen can reveal a palpable bladder and often can
provoke great discomfort.
• Rectal examination: Rectal masses, impaction of
stool, and perineal sensation/reflexes should be evaluated. Examination of the prostate gland to evaluate
for malignancy or prostatitis should be performed.
However, a prostate with a normal consistency and
size does not rule out obstructive pathology.
• Pelvic examination: Urinary retention in females
can be a sign of pelvic malignancy or severe pelvic
floor weakness.
• Laboratory evaluation: Urine should be sent for
routine urinalysis and culture (usually after catheter
placement). Additionally, studies should be
performed according to the clinical scenario.
B. The initial management of AUR involves prompt bladder decompression. This can be accomplished with
urethral or suprapubic catheterization. Although there
are no uniform guidelines for bladder decompression,
most urologists prefer urethral catheterization for the
initial management of AUR. Because patients with AUR
more often present to a medical office or emergency
department than to a urology office, clinician comfort
with urethral catheterization is likely to greatly exceed
suprapubic (SP) catheterization.
Placement of an SP catheter is sometimes necessary in
patients with urethral stricture disease, severe BPH, or
other anatomic abnormalities that preclude Foley catheter
placement per urethra. SP catheters are usually placed by
an urologist, but they may be placed by others on an emergency basis. Ultrasound guidance may be indicated when
adhesions are possible from prior abdominal surgery.
We prefer SP catheters in patients, especially females, who are expected to require long-term bladder
drainage. SP catheters prevent bladder neck and urethral dilation and therefore prevent urinary incontinence resulting from sphincter dysfunction. Furthermore, SP catheters for men avoid the risk of subsequent
urethral stricture, a common complication in men requiring long-term urethral catheterization.
(Continued on page 572)

571
Patient with URINARY RETENTION

A History and physical examination,
including neurologic examination

Urine analysis and culture
Metabolic panel

Acute retention

Chronic retention

B Urethral Foley

Cont’d on p 573

or
SP tube

Cont’d on p 573

572
C. Clean intermittent catheterization (CIC) as a decompression strategy has been advocated, with data suggesting improvement in the rate of spontaneous voiding and reduction in urinary infections when compared
to indwelling catheters. Although this option is associated with a reduction in complications when compared
to indwelling catheter placement, it is associated with
certain disadvantages including patient preference,
nursing time (inpatients/nursing home), and ongoing
care and management (supplies, etc.). However, this
option still represents a solution superior to an indwelling catheter and should be advocated when possible.
In the past, it was recommended that initial urine
drainage be limited to 500–1000 ml to reduce the complications of transient hematuria, hypotension, and
postobstructive diuresis. Current practice has recognized that partial drainage and clamping are not necessary with AUR and may increase the risk for urinary
tract infection. Rapid complete bladder decompression can be conducted safely, provided prudent supportive care is available and special attention is given
to patients who are elderly or infirm.
Once the bladder is safely decompressed, consideration must be given to hospital admission versus outpatient management. Hospitalization is indicated for patients who are uroseptic or have obstruction related to
malignancy or spinal cord compression. The majority of
patients can be managed on an outpatient basis after
bladder drainage. Prophylactic antibiotics are not routinely indicated unless suspicion exists for a urinary infection at the time of drainage. Additional instructions
regarding catheter and drainage bag management
should be given prior to discharge.
Emergent surgical therapy rarely is recommended
because it tends to be associated with a greater risk of
complication or death as compared to bladder decompression and delayed surgical intervention. In rare instances, a prostatic abscess is diagnosed and drained
via transurethral resection or transrectal ultrasound
guidance. This will often relieve both urinary retention
and septic sequelae.
D. Following an initial episode of urinary retention, a patient can be given a trial without a catheter (“voiding
trial”). This usually occurs 2–3 days following catheter
placement. Successful voiding is reported in 20%–40%
of patients. The optimal duration of catheterization
prior to removal has been evaluated with contradictory
findings. A detailed discussion is beyond the scope of
this section. However, in practice we often use an interval between 3 and 14 days, depending on the clinical circumstances.
Several factors favor voiding after catheter removal.
These factors include age "65 years, detrusor pressure

!35 cm H2O, a drained volume of "1 L at initial bladder decompression, and the identification of a precipitating event. Prior to the era of medical intervention for
obstructive voiding, studies determined that 50% of
patients who initially voided on catheter removal developed another episode of AUR within 1 week and 67%
would develop a second episode within 1 year.
E. The two main classes of drugs used in the treatment of
BPH are alpha blockers and 5-alpha reductase inhibitors. Alpha blockers function to relieve the mechanical
obstruction associated with BPH by relaxation of the
smooth muscle at the bladder neck and the prostatic
capsule. The use of alpha blockers in patients with AUR
prior to catheter removal has a beneficial effect on a
voiding trial. A variety of alpha blockers (terazosin,
doxazosin, tamsulosin) are presently available with similar efficacy and side effect profiles. 5-Alpha reductase
inhibitors (finasteride, dutasteride) provide selective
blockade for the conversion of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone. This effectively reduces the prostatic
volume over time. Medications in this category decrease the incidence of AUR in men with BPH. Additionally, 5-alpha reductase inhibitors do not have a role
in the acute management of AUR because several
weeks of therapy are required before optimal efficacy.
F. Surgical therapy remains the definitive treatment of
AUR. Among symptomatic patients with BPH, transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) reduces the
risk of developing AUR by 85%–90%. TURP remains
the gold standard, although a variety of other modalities
are available. The common goal remains the endoscopic
ablation of prostatic tissue thought to be the source of
the obstruction.
With respect to the timing of surgery, the general
recommendation is to wait #30 days following an episode of AUR. Patients who undergo TURP immediately following an episode of AUR are at a greatly increased risk of complications, including intraoperative
bleeding and sepsis.
In our view, all patients being evaluated for surgical
intervention following an episode of AUR require urodynamic evaluation to determine whether retention is
directly related to outlet obstruction, with concomitant
elevation in bladder pressures or to an inefficient bladder muscle. Patients with bladder impairment are unlikely to benefit from a surgical procedure aimed at reducing outlet resistance.
The use of urethral stenting provides only modest
improvement and is associated with a variety of complications, including stent migration, infection, encrustation, and calculus formation. This modality is
presently reserved for patients unfit for more invasive
surgical intervention.

573
Patient with URINARY RETENTION
(Cont’d from p 571)

Chronic retention

D Voiding trial
72 hr

Voids

E Commence

alpha blocker in
men with BPH

C Urethral Foley
or
CIC

G Fails void trial
F Urodynamics at

Monitor post-void
residuals over time

Urodynamics

4–6 wk

TURP for obstruction
Manage according to
cause of retention

References
Choong S, Emberton M. Acute urinary retention. BJU Int 2000;85(2):
186–201.
Contemporary Urology. Urology Times 2005 Fact Book. 2005. Advanstar
Medical Economics Healthcare Communications Secondary Research
Services.
Curtis LA, Dolan TS, Cespedes RD. Acute urinary retention and urinary
incontinence. Emerg Med Clin North Am 2001;19(3):591–619.
Emberton M, Anson K. Acute urinary retention in men: an age old problem. BMJ 1999;318(7188):921–925.
Fong YK, Milani S, Djavan B. Natural history and clinical predictors of
clinical progression in benign prostatic hyperplasia. Curr Opin Urol
2005;15(1):35–38.

Jacobsen SJ, Jacobson DJ, Girman CJ, et al. Natural history of prostatism:
risk factors for acute urinary retention. J Urol 1997;158(2):481–487.
Murray K, Massey A, Feneley RC. Acute urinary retention—a urodynamic
assessment. Br J Urol 1984;56(5):468–473.
Powell PH, Smith PJ, Feneley RC. The identification of patients at risk
from acute retention. Br J Urol 1980;52(6):520–522.
Thomas K, Chow K, Kirby RS. Acute urinary retention: a review of
the aetiology and management. Prostate Cancer Prostatic Dis
2004;7(1):32–37.

