URTICARIA

Urticaria is a vascular reaction of the skin characterized
by evanescent edematous plaques (wheals, hives). Angioedema differs only in that the edema extends into the deep
dermis and subcutaneous tissue. About 15% of the population develops this problem at some time in life. In about
60% of cases the lesions resolve in !6 weeks (acute urticaria); in the remaining patients the disease persists longer,
usually in the form of recurrent episodes.
A. In about 25% of cases a definite cause can be uncovered, and in most of these patients the history and
physical examination alone are sufficient to determine
the cause.
B. The most common cause of acute urticaria is a drug
reaction. The agents often implicated are sulfonamides,
penicillin derivatives, barbiturates, diuretics, and antiinflammatory agents. Medications taken within 14 days
of the onset of the urticaria are the most likely offenders. Certain foods such as nuts, shellfish, and eggs may
produce urticaria in susceptible individuals. Focal infections, such as sinusitis or genitourinary infections,
and systemic infections, such as viral hepatitis or infectious mononucleosis, occasionally produce urticaria. In
rare instances, patients may develop localized wheals
after direct contact with an offending agent (contact
urticaria).
C. Certain chronic skin diseases have lesions that appear
urticarial and must be differentiated from urticaria.
Urticaria pigmentosa (mastocytosis) presents with stable brown papules that urticate when rubbed. The lesions of urticarial vasculitis are wheals that persist for
several days and often have a violaceous color. These
diagnoses can be confirmed by a skin biopsy.
D. Many cases of chronic urticaria are secondary to physical stimuli that produce hives in susceptible patients.
Dermographism occurs in 5% of the population and
consists of wheals that develop 1–3 minutes after skin

118

stroking. Stimuli as innocuous as toweling after bathing
or rubbing one’s eyes can produce hives. Less commonly, patients develop wheals after cold, heat, water,
or sun exposure. Patients with cholinergic urticaria
develop 2- to 4-mm wheals within 2–20 minutes after
general overheating of the body, such as occurs after
vigorous exercise.
E. In patients with chronic urticaria that is not secondary
to physical stimuli, a routine noninvasive laboratory
screen is indicated. However, abnormal laboratory test
results rarely uncover an occult cause of urticaria in
the face of a normal history and physical examination.
F. In many patients an identifiable cause of chronic urticaria is never uncovered. In some of these there may
be psychogenic influences that exacerbate the urticarial episodes. Others may have a genetic tendency that
makes them more prone to hives from a variety of
stimuli. Some cases of chronic urticaria are caused by
an autoimmune phenomenon in which autoantibodies
bind to IgE receptors on the surface of mast cells, resulting in mast cell activation and degranulation.
References
Arndt KA, Leboit PE, Robinson JK, Wintroub BU, eds. Cutaneous
Medicine and Surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1996.
Bolognia J, Jorizza J, Rapine R. Dermatology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier, 2007.
Hirschmann JV, Lawlor F, English JSC, et al. Cholinergic urticaria: a
clinical and histologic study. Arch Dermatol 1987;123:462.
Jacobson KW, Branch CB, Nelson HS. Laboratory tests in chronic urticaria. JAMA 1980;243:1644.
Kulp-Shorten CL, Callen JP. Urticaria, angioedema, and rheumatologic
disease. Rheum Dis Clin North Am 1996;22:95.
Mahmood T. Urticaria. Am Fam Physician 1995;51:811.
Pollack CV Jr, Romano TJ. Outpatient management of acute urticaria: the
role of prednisone. Ann Emerg Med 1995;26:547.
Sveum RJ. Urticaria: the diagnostic challenge of hives. Postgrad Med
1996;100:77.
Wolff K, Goldsmith LA, Katz SI, et al: Fitzpatrick’s Dermatology in General Medicine, 7th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2007.

119
Patient with URTICARIA

A History

Physical examination

C Exclude by skin biopsy:
B Acute urticaria

Chronic urticaria
("6 wk)

(!6 wk)

Consider:
Drug reaction
Food hypersensitivity
Infection
Contact urticaria
Transfusion reaction

D Physical stimuli

Consider:
Dermatographism
Cold urticaria
Heat urticaria
Solar urticaria
Aquagenic urticaria
Cholinergic urticaria

E CBC

ANA
Chemistry screen
Urinalysis
Stool ova and parasites

Consider:
Lupus erythematosus
Parasitic disease
Chronic infection
Occult malignancy

Urticaria pigmentosa
Urticarial vasculitis (p 122)

Normal workup

F Idiopathic urticaria

