A. Certain medications have a narrow therapeutic index (NTI), meaning there is a narrow range for a serum drug level (SDL) that will provide a therapeutic effect with minimal risk of toxicity. Examples of NTI medications include carbamazepine, digoxin, phenytoin, procainamide, quinidine, theophylline, lithium, cyclosporine, and the aminoglycoside antibiotics (see the chapter Use and Monitoring of Aminoglycoside Antibiotics). SDL assays can be useful when there is a known correlation between the SDL and pharmacologic effect of the drug. The availability of an SDL assay from the laboratory does not necessarily mean there is utility in measuring an SDL in a given patient. Some drugs may be monitored by SDL only under certain circumstances (e.g., aspirin in Kawasaki's syndrome). Prior to obtaining an SDL, it is important to consider the need for the drug and SDL while including an evaluation of the clinical goals, the outcomes that will be measured to assess these goals, and the risk of toxicity based on the drug dose and length of therapy. The availability of less toxic alternative agents with similar therapeutic efficacy should be considered. SDL assays are a tool to monitoring therapeutic outcomes, but the SDL is not in itself an outcome.
B. Proper therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) requires obtaining SDLs at appropriate times for a particular drug therapy to maximize efficacy and minimize toxicity.
C. The use of pharmacokinetic calculations or nomograms often is helpful in developing a patient-specific drug-dosing regimen based on SDLs. Patient-specific parameters such as weight, height, age, sex, and renal and hepatic function should be obtained because these factors can affect an SDL and the response to drug therapy.
D. Most therapeutic or reference ranges of NTI drugs are based on a trough blood level, usually defined as an SDL obtained ≤30 minutes before the next scheduled dose of the drug. Drawing an SDL too early may cause an erroneously high level to be reported, resulting in misinterpretation of the data and potentially inappropriate changes in therapy. This can be especially problematic if the blood is drawn during the infusion or distribution phase of the drug (e.g., digoxin). The distribution phase is the period in which the drug in plasma is equilibrating with extravascular fluid and tissues into which the drug will distribute.
E. It is important that a patient's response to the medication be considered rather than just the reported SDL. SDLs are tools to supplement clinical response while achievement of desired therapeutic outcomes is the primary measure.
F. Changing a drug-dosing regimen on the basis of an SDL should be carefully considered. All benefits and risks of a dosage change need to be taken into account. For example, when a theophylline level has been reported correctly as 19 µg/ml (therapeutic 10–20 µg/ml) but the patient has not experienced clinical benefit, it is probably more prudent to add an additional therapy or switch to an alternative agent rather than to obtain a higher SDL. Additionally, possible drug interactions and the patient's compliance with the drug schedule should be considered prior to any dosage adjustments based on an SDL.
G. An SDL is often more useful when the patient's blood is drawn after steady state (SS) has been achieved. SS is when the rate of the drug administered is equal to the rate of drug elimination in drugs that have linear kinetics. Drawing blood and determining an SDL before the drug has reached SS may result in a lower-than-expected level than will occur at SS. SS is achieved after four to five half-lives of the drug and is independent of the number of doses given. Therefore, to calculate when a drug will reach SS, the clinician must first estimate the half-life of the drug for the particular patient (including effects of renal and liver dysfunction). If a loading dose of the drug was given, a higher-than-expected SDL may be seen prior to SS.
H. Certain total (protein-bound and free-drug) concentration SDL measurements for highly protein-bound agents such as phenytoin and salicylates should be evaluated based on several factors, including the patient's serum albumin level, renal function, coadministration of certain other agents, and any other factor that may alter the degree of protein-binding prior to dosage adjustments.

