USE AND EVALUATION OF VANCOMYCIN SERUM DRUG LEVEL

A. Vancomycin is a glycopeptide antibiotic introduced in
the 1950s for gram-positive bacterial infections. Although once referred to as “Mississippi mud” for its
muddy consistency (fermentation broth impurities), improved purification methods have changed both the appearance and adverse event profile of this drug. With its
improved safety profile and the increasing incidence of
multi–drug-resistant organisms, vancomycin use in both
empiric and organism-specific treatment has increased.
When using vancomycin empirically, it is important to
consider the probable organism, local susceptibility patterns, and nationally recognized guidelines. After the
need for vancomycin therapy has been determined, the
need for vancomycin serum drug level (VSDL) monitoring must be decided. Although many clinicians still
maintain the importance of monitoring vancomycin
VSDLs, it is important to consider clinical outcomes
when determining the need for VSDL monitoring. Relatively healthy patients requiring short-term therapy may
not require a VSDL, whereas VSDL monitoring may be
indicated in patients with renal insufficiency requiring
long-term therapy and those who have unstable renal
function or those with difficult-to-treat infections.
B. VSDL monitoring commonly consists of trough levels
and occasionally peak levels. The utility of peak levels is
controversial; however, peak levels are obtained
30–90 minutes after the end of an infusion. Trough VSDLs are obtained within 60 minutes prior to the next
dose. It is recommended that VSDLs be obtained after
the drug has reached steady state. Patient-specific parameters such as renal function, age, weight, site of
infection, comorbidities, and route of administration

712

C.

D.

E.

F.

should be included in VSDL evaluations (see Use and
Evaluation of Serum Drug Levels for more details).
A patient’s clinical response to vancomycin therapy
is more important than whether a VSDL is within a
standard therapeutic range (see Use and Evaluation of
Serum Drug Levels for more details).
If a patient’s abnormal WBC count, temperature, imaging studies, and other indicators of infection are not
resolving within a reasonable time period, vancomycin
therapy may need to be intensified or it may not be
adequate antimicrobial coverage for the infection.
Other clinical causes of these parameters should be
considered.
Alternatively, if signs and symptoms of vancomycin
toxicity are evident, such as leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, ototoxicity, or nephrotoxicity, an alternative antimicrobial should be considered. Other reported adverse
effects such as myalgias, “red man’s” syndrome, hypotension, and thrombophlebitis can generally be avoided
by administering vancomycin through a central venous
catheter over !60 minutes depending on the dose.
If multiple VSDLs are obtained and a pharmacokinetic
evaluation is desired, consider consulting a clinical pharmacy specialist. Many patients may not require more
than one VSDL depending on the duration of therapy.
Short-term therapy is not likely to require VSDL monitoring unless renal function is impaired. Patients with
fluctuating renal function or an unstable clinical course
may require more frequent VSDL monitoring. Patients
receiving continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT),
hemodialysis, or other renal alteration therapies should
be evaluated individually.
(Continued on page 714)

713
Patient for Use and Evaluation of VANCOMYCIN SERUM DRUG LEVELS

A Assess need for vancomycin
and need for VSDL

If clinically indicated, obtain
cultures prior to initiation
of vancomycin therapy

B Obtain VSDL
C Assess reported VSDL based
on standard SDL evaluation
Assess patient’s clinical
response to therapy

D Clinical efficacy of

vancomycin therapy?

Yes

No

E Signs of toxicity or other
adverse drug event?

Yes

No

Vancomycin therapy clinically
needed and no alternative
antibiotic available based on
culture results and patient’s
risk factor?
Yes

No
Consider alternative
agents or change in
vancomycin dose

VSDL drawn at
steady state (SS)?

Yes

No
Assess current SDL and
need to repeat SDL when
vancomycin has reached SS

Two or more levels obtained
(i.e., peak and trough)?

Yes

Type of dosing
regimen

F If clinically indicated,

use pharmacokinetic
parameters of vancomycin
to evaluate levels

Cont’d on p 715

714
G. Dosage adjustments can be made by changing dose,
frequency of administration, or both. Increasing the
dose can increase peak concentrations and increase the
time the concentration is above a desired trough level.
Increasing the frequency of administration can have
less of an effect on peak levels (at steady state) and can
increase trough levels. The method of increasing dose
frequency is generally more appropriate with vancomycin because it exhibits time-dependent killing rather
than concentration-dependent killing.
H. Evaluation of a patient’s VSDL should include clinical
status, culture results, and the predicted penetration of
the drug to the site of infection. The trough VSDL range
for the majority of infections is traditionally reported
as 5–15 µg/ml. Recently, clinical practice trends have
used a trough VSDL target of 15–20 µg/ml for infections
at sites with relatively poor vancomycin penetration such
as the lungs and bones. Peak VSDL targets once aimed
for 30–40 µg/ml; however, these ranges were empiric
and there are limited data in the literature to support this
practice.
I. Continuous infusions of vancomycin can maintain a
relatively constant level of drug in the blood, which is
theoretically advantageous with an agent that exhibits
time-dependent killing. Lung, cerebrospinal fluid, and

bone tend to be poorly penetrated by vancomycin, and
levels achieved will be considerably less than the
reported VSDL. If the site of infection is a difficultto-penetrate tissue, random VSDLs should target the
upper end of the desired range. Although SDLs can be
relatively constant over a 24-hour period, the exposure
to the drug is normally less than that of intermittent
dosing regimens.

References
American Thoracic Society; Infectious Diseases Society of America. Guidelines for the management of adults with hospital-acquired, ventilatorassociated, and healthcare-associated pneumonia. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med 2005;171:388–416.
Baddour LM, Wilson WR, Bayer AS, et al. Infective endocarditis. Circulation 2005;111:e394–434.
Darko W, Medicis JJ, Smith A, et al. Mississippi mud no more: costeffectiveness of pharmacokinetic dosage adjustment of vancomycin to
prevent nephrotoxicity. Pharmacotherapy 2003;23(5):643–650.
Kitzis MD, Goldstein FW. Monitoring of vancomycin serum levels for
the treatment of staphylococcal infections. Clin Microbiol Infect
2006;12(1):92–95.
Tunkel AR, Hartman BJ, Kaplan SL, et al. Practice guidelines for the
management of bacterial meningitis. Clin Infect Dis 2004;39:1267–1284.
Vuagnat A, Stern R, Lotthe A, et al. High-dose vancomycin for osteomyelitis: continuous vs. intermittent infusions. J Clin Pharm Ther
2004;29(4):351–357.

715
Type of dosing regimen
(Cont’d from p 713)

I Continuous

G Intermittent

In general, any random
vancomycin SDL should
remain above MIC;
depending on site of
infection and culture
results, random vancomyin
SDL should be >5 "g/ml*

H Evaluate goal level

vancomycin infusion

vancomycin infusion

based on type and
site of infection

Trough level between
5 and 20 "g/ml*

Trough level >20 "g/ml*

Trough level <5 "g/ml*

Based on above clinical
evaluation no change
in dose may be indicated
unless signs of toxicity
or if patient’s clinical
status changes

Based on above clinical
evaluation and risk of
toxicity either no change
in dose my be indicated
or
Decrease dose based on
patient’s pharmacokinetic
parameters

Based on above clinical
evaluation either increase
dose based on patient’s
pharmacokinetic parameters
or
Consider alternative therapy

Recheck SDL if clinically
indicated and return to B

Recheck SDL if clinically
indicated and return to B

Recheck SDL if clinically
indicated and return to B

* Recommended goal trough vancomycin SDL is subject to change.
Recent reports in the literature suggest that higher trough SDLs may be indicated in certain clinical situations.

