Early studies found that oral contraceptives (OCs), which had a greater amount of estrogen, were associated with serious adverse outcomes. Today's low-dose formulations retain efficacy while minimizing side effects and have an overall lower risk of cardiovascular disease. OCs contain synthetic estrogens and progestins. They differ in dosage, proportion of active ingredients, and prescribed regimens. Effectiveness, safety, and patient acceptability are important in selection of OC products. Provide a product that offers the lowest effective dose of both hormones and minimizes side effects. Data are not available for determining which OC is "better"; cost considerations should be included in product selection.
A. Before prescribing an OC, obtain a complete history, including history of previous contraceptive use and failures or adverse effects of previously used methods; menstrual history, focusing on patterns and problems; history of blood clots and tobacco use; gynecologic and obstetric history; family history of coagulopathy; and general medical history. Perform a complete physical examination in which risk factors are assessed and contraindications to OC use determined. Order appropriate laboratory tests as necessary.
B. Monophasic pills contain a constant estrogen and progestin dose. Biphasic products contain a constant dose of estrogen, with a lower progestin dose on days 1-10 than on days 11-21. Triphasic pills have varied amounts of hormones; Ortho-Novum 777, Tri-Levlen, Tri-Cyclen, and Triphasil have an increase of progestin at midcycle and end cycle; Tri-Norinyl has increased progestin only at midcycle. Ortho-Novum 777, Tri-Cyclen, and Tri-Norinyl have fixed amounts of estrogen; Triphasil and Tri-Levlen have increased estrogen at midcycle. These differences in triphasic pills are generally insignificant in most women who do not have specific problems or menstrual irregularities.
Ethinyl estradiol (EE) and mestranol are the two estrogen agents used in OCs. EE is pharmacologically active and mestranol is hepatically converted to EE. Progestins used in OCs include norethindrone, norethindrone acetate, ethynodiol diacetate, dl-norgestrel, norethynodrel, levonorgestrel, desogestrel, and norgestimate. Norethindrone acetate and ethynodiol diacetate are metabolized to norethindrone and offer no significant advantage over norethindrone. dl-Norgestrel and levonorgestrel are isomers, levonorgestrel being the active component. Some studies suggest that dl-norgestrel has little pharmacologic activity, but others state that it prevents breakthrough bleeding (BTB) more effectively. Norgestrel, levonorgestrel, and desogestrel have the highest progestational effects. Norethynodrel has the highest estrogenic effects with all others having minimal to no estrogenic effects. The greatest androgenic effects are seen by norgestrel and levonorgestrel.
Estrogen is the major determinant for inducing increases in blood pressure (BP); however, progestins also may be associated. Carbohydrate and lipid alterations are caused by the progestin component in OCs. Desogestrel, norgestimate, and low doses of norethindrone have little if any effects on carbohydrate metabolism. Progestins decrease high-density lipoproteins (HDLs) and increase low-density lipoproteins (LDLs); estrogens have the opposite effect.
A back-up method of birth control is recommended with the first cycle of OCs. Compliance is important for low-dose OCs because missed pills often lead to breakthrough ovulation.
C. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists states that nonsmoking healthy women aged 35-44 years may continue using OCs. However, women with preexisting diseases that affect the cardiovascular system should not use OCs. Use clinical judgment in deciding whether any woman with cardiovascular disease risk factors (e.g., hypertension, diabetes mellitus, or hypercholesterolemia) should use OCs. Some studies of low-dose OCs show no increased risk of cardiovascular complications; however, OCs are currently considered synergistic in increased risk, and each patient must be carefully evaluated for OC use. Follow and monitor patients closely, and offer alternative contraceptive methods when indicated, especially for smokers >35 years of age.
D. Progestin-only pills, or “mini-pills," have lower effectiveness than combination OCs (COCs) because ovulation is not consistently inhibited. Progestin-only pills are taken every day of the month, without a break for withdrawal bleeding. Up to two thirds of users experience menstrual irregularities, BTB, and amenorrhea. Mini-pills also are used in lactating women.
E. There is some concern about infant exposure to estrogens. Some believe this exposure is not clinically significant; others advocate waiting until an infant is weaned before instituting OC use. The pill may diminish the protein content and volume of breast milk. The FDA recommends deferring the use of OCs until a baby is weaned.
F. Diabetic patients whose diabetes is controlled may take low-dose OCs. Products with norethindrone, desogestrel, or norgestimate are least likely to alter glucose tolerance. Pregnancy prevention needs to be weighted against the risk of pregnancy, and the risk of fetal malformations in poorly controlled diabetic pregnancies.
G. ACHES is a mnemonic commonly used to help remember possible adverse effects of OCs: A, abdominal pain (gallbladder disease, hepatic adenoma, pancreatitis, blood clot); C, chest pain (pulmonary embolism, myocardial infarction); H, headaches (stroke, migraines, hypertension); E, eye problems (hypertension, stroke); S, severe leg pain (venous thromboembolism). COCs have relative estrogen dominance, and estrogen-related side effects can be expected to predominate. Familiarization with symptoms of estrogen/progestin excess/deficiency will aid in OC adjustments. Symptoms of estrogen excess include nausea, breast tenderness, fluid retention, cervical mucorrhea, and cyclic headaches, whereas estrogen deficiency is suggested by early or midcycle BTB, increased spotting, and hypomenorrhea. Symptoms of progestin excess are increased appetite, depression, fatigue, acne, diabetogenic effects, and decreased libido; symptoms of progestin deficiency include late-cycle BTB, amenorrhea, and hypermenorrhea. An excess of both hormones can cause headaches, weight gain, and hypertension. Many symptoms occurring in the first cycle of OC use improve by the second or third cycle.
H. Lowering the potency of OCs for greater safety has led to an increased incidence of BTB. BTB is common in the first few cycles of OC use.
I. Estrogens are conjugated in the liver and hydrolyzed by intestinal bacteria. Any drug that affects these two systems may lead to decreased OC efficacy.
J. The absence of withdrawal bleeding may be the result of insufficient endometrial development. Switching to an OC with greater progestin content may resolve the problem.
K. An increase in BP may be seen even in normotensive patients. Increases can occur 1–36 months after initiation of the OC. The risk is lower with low-dose OCs. Patients who are started on OCs should be checked for BP changes within the first month. When hypertension is associated with an OC, it is reversible. Monitor any patient who develops hypertension while taking OCs closely for the development of OC-associated complications. A return to normal BP after discontinuation of OC may take 3-6 months.
L. Breast tenderness usually is caused by cyclic fluid retention or growth of breast tissue. An OC with lower estrogenic activity or greater progestational activity or an OC with less estrogen and less progestin may alleviate the tenderness. If tenderness persists, a progestin-only pill may be tried.
M. Nausea may occur often during the first few cycles of OC use or may occur with the first few pills of each cycle. Many patients can prevent nausea by taking the pill with food or at bedtime. If nausea persists, an OC with lower estrogenic activity (as little as 20 µg in severe cases) may bring relief. Vomiting is rare. If vomiting occurs within 2 hours after taking the OC, the dose should be repeated to ensure contraception.
N. Weight loss and gain occur with equal frequency in OC users. Most weight changes are unrelated to OC use. However, estrogen can cause cyclic weight gain as a result of fluid retention, and progestins can stimulate appetite and insulin release.
O. There is an increased risk of stroke in OC users with a history of migraine. Cerebrovascular accident (CVA) must be ruled out in all OC users who have migraine headaches. Vascular (migrainelike) headaches generally do not improve with a change in OC; these patients need to consider alternative contraceptive methods. Headaches accompanied by fluid retention (edema, breast enlargement, cyclic weight gain) may be caused by both estrogens and progestins. Prescribe an OC with lower estrogenic or progestational activity and follow the patient closely to ensure resolution of symptoms after one or two cycles.
P. Depression may be caused by an excess of estrogen or progestin or by a deficiency of estrogen. If switching to an OC with lower estrogenic or progestational activity does not alleviate the depression, the pill should be discontinued for three to six cycles and reevaluation performed at that time.

