VAGINAL BLEEDING IN PREGNANCY


Bleeding in pregnancy may have a number of causes, including obstetric, gynecologic, and nongynecologic causes.
It is relatively common, complicating up to 5% of term
pregnancies. Rapidly determining the cause is of utmost
importance to ensure maternal and fetal well-being.
A. Initial management, regardless of gestational age, includes stabilization of the patient followed by thorough
history and physical examination, with determination
of the amount and rate of bleeding. Once the patient is
hemodynamically stable, investigate the cause of the
bleeding.
B. Gestational age can be estimated by date of last menstrual period, fundal height, or sonography. The main
differential diagnosis for bleeding in early pregnancy is
spontaneous abortion (SAb) and ectopic pregnancy.
Proceed immediately to speculum examination.
C. SAb is termination of pregnancy before 20 weeks
(!500 g). Bleeding in SAb is caused by hemorrhage
into the decidua basalis and necrotic changes in the tissue. If when the speculum is placed there is blood in
the vagina but the cervical opening (os) is closed,
threatened abortion is the diagnosis. About half of
women who bleed in the first trimester go on to abort.
If the bleeding is associated with pain and cramping,
the prognosis is worse. However, if fetal cardiac activity
is demonstrated, only 10% proceed to abortion (fetal
cardiac activity can be documented by transvaginal ultrasound [US] at 5 weeks). Management is complete
pelvic rest; bed rest is not warranted.
D. Bleeding is the most common sign of a molar pregnancy and can be intermittent or continuous, lasting
weeks to months. The bleeding usually is brown,
rarely bright red. Other signs include uterine size
greater than expected for gestational age, intractable
nausea and vomiting, highly elevated levels of betahuman chorionic gonadotropin ("-hCG), or high
blood pressure. The diagnosis is confirmed by US,
which may show a complete mole or a partial mole
with coexisting viable pregnancy. Treatment is evacuation, with serial "-hCG determinations until undetectable, and delaying conception for at least 1 year.
Chemotherapy may be required if "-hCG remains
elevated.
E. Cervicitis from chlamydial infection or gonorrhea
can present with spotting and increased vaginal discharge. On speculum examination there are signs of

586

F.
G.

H.

I.

inflammation and purulent discharge. Vaginitis most
commonly is caused by bacterial vaginosis, trichomoniasis, or candidiasis. Vaginitis tends to present with
serosanguineous discharge, especially after intercourse. Cervical polyps and cervical cancer also can
present with bleeding. On speculum examination,
polyps appear to be hanging out of the cervical canal
and are smooth, soft, and red to purple. They bleed
readily when touched. Cervical cancer often has
a cauliflower-like, necrotic appearance. Both cause
bleeding after intercourse or vaginal examination.
Nongynecologic causes include urinary tract infection,
GI bleeding, lymphoma, and thrombocytopenia.
If on speculum examination the os is closed and there is
no blood in the vagina but fetal cardiac activity is absent
on US or fetal Doppler (present after about 10 weeks),
a missed abortion has occurred; that is, the fetus has
died but has been retained, often for weeks. Management generally is elective evacuation to decrease the
risk of sepsis or DIC.
In ectopic pregnancy implantation occurs at a site other
than the endometrium, most commonly (96%) in the
tubes. Bleeding is thought to be the result of the pregnancy outgrowing its blood supply, which leads to
declining endocrine function of the placenta, resulting
in inadequate endometrial support with subsequent
breakthrough bleeding. Bleeding usually is scant and
associated with abdominal pain, often unilateral. Diagnosis is made by serial "-hCG determinations and sonography. The "-hCG level doubles every 48 hours in a
normal pregnancy. Ectopic pregnancies have impaired
production of "-hCG and thus have a prolonged doubling time. Transvaginal US allows visualization of
a gestational sac once the "-hCG is #1500 mIU/ml,
whereas transabdominal US can detect the sac if
"-hCG is #6000 mIU/ml. If no sac is seen in the
uterus, ectopic pregnancy is presumed. Treatment is
laparoscopic salpingostomy, laparotomy if the patient is
hemodynamically unstable, or intramuscular injection
of methotrexate if the sac is !4 cm and unruptured.
Regardless of treatment modality, "-hCG level is followed until undetectable.
If the os is open on speculum examination, inevitable
abortion is the diagnosis. Bleeding in an inevitable abortion usually is associated with cramping. Management
may be expectant or may consist of evacuation of the
products of conception (POC).
(Continued on page 588)

587
Pregnant Patient with VAGINAL BLEEDING

A History:

Stabilize patient
Amount of bleeding
Determine gestational
age

B !20 wk

#20 wk

Speculum examination

Cont’d on p 589

Cervical os
closed

Cervical os
open

US to determine
viability

I Inevitable

J Incomplete

abortion

Fetal cardiac
activity

abortion

C
D

K Incompetent
cervix

No fetal cardiac
activity

G Missed

Obstetric
causes:
Threatened
abortion
Partial mole
Loss of twin

abortion

E Gynecologic
causes:
Cervicitis
Vaginitis
Polyps
Cancer

D Molar

pregnancy

H Ectopic

pregnancy

F Nongynecologic

J. An incomplete abortion has occurred when the os is
open and there has been partial passage of the POC.
Bleeding can be significant because the retained POC
do not allow complete myometrial contraction and
uterine involution. Evacuation is mandated to prevent
significant hemorrhage and sepsis.

causes

K. In incompetent cervix the os is open with symptoms of
pelvis pressure, low back pain, and increased vaginal
discharge. Risk factors include previous cervical laceration or surgery and exposure to diethylstilbestrol (DES).
Treatment is attempted emergency cerclage in the existing pregnancy and elective cerclage in future pregnancies at 10–14 weeks.

588
L. Vaginal bleeding in the third trimester is an absolute
contraindication to pelvic examination until the location of the placenta can be determined. Therefore US
must be performed to rule out placenta previa before
further examination. Speculum or digital examination
in the presence of placenta previa can lead to lifethreatening obstetric hemorrhage.
M. Placenta previa is abnormal implantation of the placenta over the cervical os. Complete placenta previa
covers the os; partial incompletely covers the os;
marginal is directly adjacent to the os. Placenta previa
complicates 1 of 200 term pregnancies and usually
presents as painless vaginal bleeding. Incidence is
increased with advanced maternal age, increased parity, and previous uterine surgery. Management from
24–36 weeks includes stabilization of the patient,
fetal monitoring, blood typing and screening, and
RhoGAM injection if indicated. Once maternal and
fetal well-being are ensured, the patient should remain hospitalized on bed rest with maintenance of
hematocrit at 30% in case of future large hemorrhage. Of those, 20% are complicated with uterine
activity because blood acts as an irritant. However,
cervical dilation cannot be determined directly, so
tocolysis may be started empirically.
N. Placental abruption results from premature separation
of the placenta before delivery. The cause in most cases
is unknown, but there is an association with increased
maternal age and parity, abdominal trauma, cocaine use,
and smoking. Abruption presents with a clinical triad
of bleeding, uterine hyperactivity/hypertonicity, and fetal distress. Diagnosis generally is clinical, although US
may support the diagnosis in 50% of cases with evidence
of retroplacental clot or other hemorrhage. Maternal
complications include shock, DIC, and ischemic necrosis. Therefore, in addition to a hemoglobin, hematocrit,
and blood type and screen, evaluation for consumptive
coagulopathy should include fibrinogen and fibrin split

products, platelets, and prothrombin time/partial thromboplastin time. RhoGAM should be given to the Rh($)
mother. A Kleihauer-Betke test will determine whether
#30 ml of fetal blood has entered the maternal circulation, necessitating additional RhoGAM therapy in the
Rh($) mother.
O. Rupture of a fetal blood vessel is a rare occurrence that
can happen in association with a velamentous insertion
of the umbilical cord. Fetal monitoring shows signs of
fetal distress, most often alternating fetal tachycardiabradycardia as the fetus attempts to compensate for
acute blood loss.
P. In preterm labor with cervical dilation, cervical change
can cause spotting secondary to dilation and effacement. Other symptoms include pelvic pressure, vaginal
discharge, and backache, with or without frank contractions. Rule out premature rupture of membranes
with sterile speculum examination looking for pooling
of amniotic fluid in the vagina, positive Nitrazine test,
and ferning. If gestation is 34 weeks, management includes betamethasone injection for fetal lung maturity,
antibiotic prophylaxis for group B streptococcus, and
tocolysis. If !34 weeks, expectant management with
bed rest and pelvic rest is recommended.
Q. Normal labor with bloody show is a final possibility.

References
Abortion. In Cunningham FG, MacDonald PC, Leveno KJ, et al, eds.
Williams Obstetrics, ed 20. Norwalk, CT: Appleton & Lange, 1996:579.
Benedetti T. Obstetric hemorrhage. In Gabbe SG, Niebyl JR, Simpson
JL, eds. Normal and Problem Pregnancies, ed 4. New York: Churchill
Livingstone, 2002:503.
Droegemueller W. Benign gynecological lesions. In Mishell DR Jr,
Stenchever MA, Droegemueller W, et al, eds. Comprehensive Gynecology, ed 4. St. Louis: Mosby, 2001:846.
Herbst AL. Malignant diseases of the cervix. In Mishell DR Jr, Stenchever
MA, Droegemueller W, et al, eds. Comprehensive Gynecology, ed 4.
St. Louis: Mosby, 2001:889.

589
Pregnant Patient with VAGINAL BLEEDING
Gestational age #20 wk
(Cont’d from p 587)

L US evaluation

M Placenta previa

Normal placenta
location
Speculum examination

Cervical os
closed

Obstetric
causes

N Abruption

E Gynecologic
causes

Cervical os
open

F Nongynecologic
causes

O Fetal bleeding
P Preterm
labor

K Incompetent
cervix

Q Normal
labor

