VAGINAL DISCHARGE

A. Vulvovaginitis is the most common complaint necessitating a gynecologic examination. It commonly is defined as inflammation of the vulva and vagina. The diagnosis is often evident from the history. Upon initial
evaluation, obtain a thorough history of previous episodes; possible sexual exposure; odor, color, and consistency of the discharge; and whether the discharge is
causing itching. Pay particular attention to factors that
can change vaginal flora, thus leading to vaginitis (recent
use of antibiotic, oral contraceptives, or spermicides;
douching). Also consider systemic conditions (poorly
controlled diabetes, menopause, AIDS).
B. The cause of the vaginitis often can be determined at
the time of speculum examination. Prepare two wet
mounts using 10% potassium hydroxide (KOH) and
normal saline and view them under low and high power.
Appearance of the discharge often can be helpful in
diagnosis: bacterial vaginosis (BV) gives a gray-white
appearance; Trichomonas vaginalis, a profuse, watery,
white green or yellow appearance; and Candida, a
white cheesy discharge. Determining the pH of the
vaginal discharge using pH indicator paper can be most
useful. Normal physiologic discharge and yeast usually
are !4.5; "5.0 may indicate Trichomonas or bacterial
vaginosis.
C. If wet mount is nondiagnostic, consider allergic reaction to chemical or physical irritants. These possibilities
are numerous and include tight clothing, deodorants,
laundry detergent, soaps, tampons, and spermicides.
Obtain culture for Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Chlamydia trachomatis in sexually active patients, and base
treatment on subsequent results. Viral causes of vulvovaginitis include human papillomavirus (HPV) and
herpes simplex virus (HSV). These often are diagnosed
by appearance but can be confirmed by biopsy and
culture. Aphthous ulcers can also occur on the vulva
with an appearance similar to HSV.
D. The appearance of the unicellular protozoan T. vaginalis
is diagnostic. Culture is not necessary for confirmation.
The appearance under high power is of mobile flagellated organisms slightly larger than a white blood cell.
The smear also may have many inflammatory cells and
vaginal epithelial cells.
Both the patient and sexual partner must be treated
with metronidazole given as a one-time 2-g dose or

576

500 mg twice a day for 7 days. Patients who are compliant, not reexposed to male partners, and fail initial
therapy may be given 1 g of metronidazole twice a
day orally along with 500 mg of metronidazole twice
a day intravaginally for 7–14 days. (The 2-g dose is
contraindicated in the first trimester of pregnancy.)
Patients should avoid alcohol ingestion while taking
metronidazole.
E. A thin gray-white discharge with an unpleasant odor
(“musty” or “fishy”) often is caused by Gardnerella
vaginalis, a gram-variable coccobacillus. The normal
saline wet mount often shows “clue cells”: stippled
epithelial cells (Gardnerella organisms adhered to
the epithelial cells). Treatment consists of oral metronidazole 500 mg twice daily for 7 days or oral clindamycin 300 mg twice daily for 7 days. Local regimens
provide similar response and are associated with
fewer systemic side effects; these consist of 0.75%
metronidazole gel inserted twice daily for 5 days or
2% clindamycin cream nightly for 7 nights. In cases of
recurrence, empirically switch to a different agent
(e.g., from metronidazole to clindamycin). If recurrence persists, extended intravaginal therapy with either metronidazole or clindamycin daily for 3 weeks
followed by intravaginal therapy every third day for
an additional 3 weeks may be warranted, allowing
lactobacilli to recolonize the vagina. Treatment of the
partner is controversial.
F. Significant vulvar pruritus is the usual presenting
symptom of vaginal yeast infections. The appearance
of filamentous forms (pseudohyphae, which are thin,
greenish, segmented, and branched) and blastospores
on KOH wet mount can confirm clinical suspicion.
Many equally effective topical treatment regimens are
available, including clotrimazole 1% cream, one applicator (5 g) per vagina every night for 7 nights or miconazole, 200-mg suppositories at bedtime for 3 nights.
The cream should also be applied to the vulva for pruritus. An alternative to topical therapy is a one-time
dose of 150 mg oral fluconazole. If necessary, this dose
can be repeated in 1 week. Studies show a single dose
of oral fluconazole to be as effective as intravaginal
suppositories. Some patients prefer this single oral
dose because of its low rate of side effects, route of
administration, and cost-effectiveness.

577
Patient with VAGINAL DISCHARGE

A History

Physical examination

B Wet mount and Pap
smear

C Nondiagnostic

Possible
allergic
reaction

D Evidence

of Trichomonas

Check
Treat Patient
cultures
and Partner
for
gonorrhea,
Chlamydia
Observe for
evidence
of HSV,
HPV, or aphthous
ulcers

E Evidence of

BV (i.e., clue cells)

F Evidence of

yeast (i.e.,
pseudohyphae)

BV

Treat Orally
or Topically
Recurrence
Topical Therapy
#3–6 wk

Treat Topically
or Orally

G Frequent recurrence
Evaluate for
risk factors
Check cultures
Treat with
30-day Topical
Course

Suppressive Therapy
#6–12 mo Topically

G. Recurrent yeast infection can be frustrating for both
practitioner and patient. Obtain culture of the discharge on Sabouraud’s or Nickerson’s medium to
confirm the cause as yeast. Evaluate for other complicating factors, including evidence of diabetes, immunodeficiency (AIDS), or reinfection from partner
(10%–15% of male sexual partners of women with
yeast infections have had positive oral, rectal, and
seminal cultures). Treatment options are varied and
include topical therapy for 30 days, and 200 mg of
ketoconazole by mouth twice daily for 14 days. Candida albicans is the cause of monilial vulvovaginitis in
"90% of cases, but occasionally Torulopsis glabrata
can be a cause of resistant yeast. A 3- to 7-day course
of terconazole often eliminates the organism.
In many cases, however, suppressive rather than
curative therapy is in order. A daily 100-mg dose of
ketoconazole orally for 6 months may be used, but this

must be weighed against the possibility of liver toxicity.
Alternatively, topical therapy for 6–12 months using
biweekly application of boric acid or an azole may decrease the frequency of recurrence. (Boric acid, oral
fluconazole, and ketoconazole should not be used during pregnancy.)
References
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Vulvovaginitis.
ACOG Technical Bulletin No. 135. Washington, DC, 1989, American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists.
Quilligan EJ, Zuspan FP. Current Therapy in Obstetrics and Gynecology,
5th ed. Philadelphia:WB Saunders, 1999.
Sobel JD. Vaginal infections in adult women. Med Clin North Am
1990;74:1573.
Sobel JD, Brooker D, Stein GE, et al. Single dose fluconazole compared
with conventional clotrimazole topical therapy of Candida vaginitis.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 1995;172:1263.
Stenchever MA. Office Gynecology, 2nd ed. St. Louis:Mosby, 1996.

