Clinical weakness can be caused by disorders affecting the muscle, the junction of nerve and muscle, the axon, or the motor neuron. A diagnostic approach to the patient who is clinically weak should attempt to resolve weakness into one of these categories. Information from the clinical course and paraclinical testing is rationally applied to narrow the differential diagnosis within each broad category.

A. The degree of diagnostic resolution that can be achieved with the history and physical examination is unmatched by any other mode of investigation. Broadly speaking, the history should provide information about the onset, context, and duration of weakness (acute, subacute, chronic, episodic; outpatient vs. hospitalized vs. critically ill patients), triggers or exacerbating factors (exertion, cold, mechanical pressure), symmetry and distribution (proximal, distal, focal), clinical accompaniments (pain, paresthesias, rash, constitutional symptoms, cramps, fasciculations), comorbidities (diabetes, thyroid disease, vascular risk factors, autoimmune disorders, malignancies), pertinent exposure history (infection, arthropod-borne diseases, medications, and toxins [including alcohol]), and family history. The physical examination should survey the entire central and peripheral nervous systems (a complete neurologic examination) to attempt lesion localization. Lesions anywhere along the course of the anterior horn cell to motor endplate can produce similar clinical signs, making discernment of muscular versus neural pathology in the lower motor neuron distribution difficult. Symmetric proximal weakness and/or muscle tenderness are more typical of muscle than nerve pathology. Myotonia, paramyotonia, or periodic paralysis implicates ion channel defects. Fatigability, atrophy, fasciculations, and loss of reflexes can occur with myopathy, neuromuscular junction (NMJ) disorders, peripheral neuropathy, or anterior horn cell disease. These signs, although not specific to lower motor neurons (LMN), are lumped under the rubric of “LMN signs.” Hyperreflexia, increased tone, and slowing of movement are signs characteristic of upper motor neurons (UMN) or their processes in long tracts from the motor cortex to white-matter tracts through the brainstem and into the spinal cord. The physical examination should document whether weakness is associated with UMN signs, LMN signs, or both.
B. When UMN signs of hyperreflexia, bradykinesis, and/or increased tone accompany pure motor weakness, diagnosis depends both on the pattern of weakness and the acuity of onset. UMN weakness evolving over minutes to hours suggests a vascular or demyelinating etiology and should be urgently evaluated by MRI. Unilateral pure motor syndromes can be produced acutely by small lesions in the contralateral primary motor cortex, internal capsule, thalamus, cerebral peduncles, or ipsilateral brainstem and pyramidal tracts. Bilateral isolated weakness can be caused acutely by a lesion of the anterior spinal cord. Pure upper motor syndromes evolving over days to weeks are unusual but could potentially occur in the context of demyelinating lesions from multiple sclerosis (MS) or viral infection or expanding mass lesions, including tumor, hematoma, parasites, or abscess in brain or spinal cord. Weakness resulting from progressive lesions affecting the spinal cord is virtually always accompanied by corresponding sensory level deficits. The presence of constitutional symptoms would support an inflammatory process. Focal pain (headache, neck or back pain) can suggest the region of interest to be evaluated by MRI. White-matter involvement seen on MRI in the brain or spinal cord should prompt cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) evaluation for markers of inflammation and infection. Any mass lesion should be evaluated with neurosurgical consultation, and those that distort normal CNS architecture by exerting “mass effect” should be evaluated urgently. UMN weakness that progresses over months to years suggests degenerative disease. Primary lateral sclerosis is a clinical diagnosis of isolated UMN degeneration affecting the face and limbs, and diagnosis can be aided by electromyography (EMG).
C. Regardless of tempo, CNS pathology more often than not produces mixed modality (motor and sensory) deficits and “neighborhood” signs to aid in localization and diagnosis. UMN-type weakness with accompanying cortical deficits in language, speech, praxis, vision, or sensation (e.g., higher-level sensation, such as stereognosis) generally indicates pathology at the level of the cerebral hemispheres. UMN-type weakness without cortical deficits but with cranial nerve deficits places the lesion in the brainstem. A clinically evident sensorimotor level suggests spinal cord pathology. At any level, in the absence of trauma, an acute evolution of deficits suggests a vascular or demyelinating event that must be emergently evaluated by MRI. The differential diagnosis for mixed-modality subacute and chronic lesions of the hemispheres, brainstem, or spinal cord is too broad to review here. A good first step in narrowing the differential, however, is gadolinium-enhanced MRI of the region of interest. Because rapid recognition and intervention often are necessary to preserve remaining neurologic function in the setting of spinal cord pathology, special mention will be made of key findings. In hyperacute spinal cord lesions, clear UMN signs may be absent. The presence of a sensory and motor level with decreased sphincter tone, however, is diagnostic of cord injury. Spinal cord lesions are generally divided into compressive (i.e., extramedullary) and intramedullary lesions. Pain tends to be a more prominent feature of compressive cord lesions. Intramedullary lesions, including tumors, demyelination, or syrinx, are often painless. Transverse myelitis is a rapid myelopathy that may be of viral, demyelinating, or vasculitic origin. Insidious myelopathies can result from vitamin deficiencies (B12, E) or HIV infection and should be investigated because deficits can be partially reversed with appropriate treatment.
D. The presence of LMN signs such as atrophy, fasciculations, or depressed reflexes in the context of weakness should prompt a thorough evaluation of the peripheral nervous system, including assessment of muscle strength and all sensory modalities. Weakness with accompanying sensory deficits can suggest a problem of the root, plexus, or peripheral nerve. The pattern and acuity of sensorimotor deficit are of key diagnostic importance. Symmetric, distal deficits (glove-and-stocking pattern) suggest a generalized length-dependent peripheral neuropathy, which should be further characterized as demyelinating or axonal by electrodiagnostic(EMG/nerve conduction study [NCS]) testing (see the section Peripheral Neuropathy chapter). Unilateral sensorimotor deficits in a dermatome-myotome pattern suggest a lesion of the relevant nerve root, which can be confirmed by MRI and/or EMG. In the context of trauma, root avulsion or neurapraxia are possible. The most common causes of radiculopathy, however, are disc herniation and neural foraminal narrowing. Sensorimotor deficits in a distribution of multiple cervical or sacrolumbar roots suggest either multilevel radiculopathy or plexopathy. Workup of these lesions can be challenging and generally begins with EMG and spinal MRI but can potentially include lumbar puncture (LP) to evaluate for cytomegalovirus, Lyme disease, or malignant cells or MRI of the affected plexus. Finally, sensorimotor deficits in the distribution of a single nerve (mononeuropathy) or multiple nerves (mononeuritis multiplex) should be evaluated first by EMG to guide subsequent workup and treatment.
E. LMN signs in the context of isolated weakness (without sensory loss) can be seen in the setting of motor neuropathy, anterior horn cell disease, NMJ disorders, or myopathy. Evaluation is greatly aided by EMG to assess for myopathic motor units, effects of repetitive stimulation, and exercise on motor unit amplitude and by NCS to rule out demyelination.
F. Disorders of the LMN include acute poliomyelitis, postpolio syndrome, spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), and progressive muscular atrophy (PMA). Although poliomyelitis is rarely seen, degeneration of previously affected anterior horn cells can occur decades after childhood disease as a postpolio syndrome. A family history of LMN disease should raise clinical suspicion for SMA, a heterogenous group of inherited motor neuronopathies that can vary in age of onset, distribution, and inheritance patterns. PMA is a sporadic LMN disease characterized by progressive weakness and atrophy that typically spares facial musculature. Often amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) presents initially with LMN-only signs and thus must be maintained on the list of differential diagnoses.
G. Of disorders of the NMJ, by far the most common is myasthenia gravis (MG), caused by antibodies that block the acetylcholine (ACh) receptor on the motor endplate. A typical history is one of diurnal variations in fatigue, ptosis, and/or diplopia with symptoms exacerbated by exercise and relieved by rest. Facial musculature is most frequently affected, particularly the eyelid and extraocular muscles. Larger muscles, including neck flexors and extensors, shoulder, and hip girdle muscles, may also be affected. A purely ocular form with low circulating titers of anti-ACh receptor antibodies can occur in older males. Diagnosis can be confirmed by specialized EMG testing, resolution of weakness with administration of edrophonium, and the detection of elevated titers of ACh receptor antibodies. The Eaton-Lambert myasthenic syndrome is a paraneoplastic condition most commonly seen in patients with small cell lung cancer. It can be differentiated from MG by increasing rather than decreasing strength with exercise on both clinical and electrophysiologic testing. Less commonly, acute intoxication with certain drugs can impair neuromuscular transmission, including penicillamine, gentamicin, kanamycin, magnesium salts, quinidine, procainamide, and lidocaine. Botulism poisoning is another relatively rare cause of acute paraparesis from NMJ dysfunction and is characterized by GI upset followed by weakness, ophthalmoplegia, and pupillary abnormalities.
H. Diseases of muscle are generally classed as dystrophies or myopathies. Disorders of the muscle can be difficult to discern clinically. Diagnosis is often supported by EMG findings and elevated serum creatinine kinase (CK) and confirmed by muscle biopsy.
I. Acquired myopathies fall into three main groups: endocrine, infectious/inflammatory, and drugs and toxins. Dysthyroid states are the most common cause of endocrine myopathies. Hyperthyroidism can produce chronic thyrotoxic myopathy, which may include ophthalmoplegia. Hypothyroid myopathy is associated with increased muscle mass and slowed reflexes. Hyperaldosteronism, acromegaly, Cushing's syndrome, hypophosphatemia, and hyperparathyroidism can also cause myopathic weakness. Inflammatory myopathies include polymyositis (PM), dermatomyositis (DM), and inclusion body myositis (IBM). PM is characterized by proximal weakness, dysphagia, and myalgia, particularly when associated with connective tissue disease. DM is similar but often has a violaceous rash in or around the orbits or scaly papules on the dorsum of the hands. IBM tends to spare the deltoids and affects the wrist and finger flexors. Other infectious/inflammatory causes of myopathy include bacteria and viruses, sarcoidosis, toxoplasmosis, trichinosis, and cysticercosis. Steroids and ethanol are the most significant causes of toxic myopathy. Other drugs to consider include guanethidine, chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine, clofibrate, lovastatin, gemfibrozil, colchicine, zidovudine, doxorubicin, emetine (in ipecac), pentazocine, potassium-lowering diuretics, and heroin. Diagnostic evaluation of acquired myopathy will typically include serum CK, ESR, or C-reactive protein (CRP); screening thyroid function tests (TFTs) and autoimmune antibodies; review of medications and alcohol use; and EMG. Definitive diagnosis usually depends on findings from a muscle biopsy.
J. Inherited muscle disorders are less commonly encountered in the adult population. Duchenne's and Becker's muscular dystrophy (MD) are X-linked, early-onset diseases characterized by severe proximal weakness, pseudohypertrophy, cardiac involvement, and high CK levels. Myotonic dystrophy is an autosomal-dominant muscle disorder characterized by myotonia, distinctive "hatchet facies,” distal weakness, and multisystem involvement. Mitochondrial myopathies are a heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by weakness, fatigability, and multisystem involvement. Diagnosis of inherited myopathies is confirmed by muscle biopsy and in some cases by genetic testing.
K. The presence of both UMN and LMN signs in one or more CNS region (bulbar, cervical, thoracic, and lumbar) is classically seen in ALS, a rapidly progressive degenerative disease of motor neurons that leads to death from respiratory failure within 1-5 years. Because of its grim prognosis and lack of effective treatment, a diagnosis of ALS should be made with EMG support after exclusion of any possible alternative diagnosis, including cervical spine disease and heavy metal poisoning.

