WHEEZING

Wheezes are continuous, high-pitched adventitious lung
sounds that are superimposed on normal breath sounds.
Wheezes are sounds that are produced by the oscillation
of the airway walls with fluid within the airway lumen that
occurs when airway caliber is narrowed to a critical value.
The pitch of the wheeze is dependent on the elastic properties of the airway walls, the viscosity of the fluid in the
airways, and the characteristics of the gas that pass through
the narrowed airway. Although asthma is often considered
the most common cause of wheezing, there are a number
of nonasthmatic pulmonary conditions and nonpulmonary
diseases associated with wheezing. A variety of diagnostic
studies can be used to evaluate the patient with wheezing
to determine the etiology of the wheeze.
A. The initial evaluation of a patient with wheezing should
determine the degree of respiratory distress that the
individual has incurred. Patients who exhibit signs
concerning for impending respiratory failure, including
tachypnea with accessory muscle use, hypoxemia,
cyanosis, or severe acute respiratory acidosis, warrant
emergent endotracheal intubation. Diagnostic studies to
determine the etiology of wheezing can be performed
after the initial stabilization of the patient. Because
rapid therapy is essential, the diagnosis of anaphylaxis
should be considered. If this is a probable cause of
wheezing and/or stridor, immediate administration of
epinephrine is required.
B. Respiratory failure resulting from severe asthma is a
condition known as status asthmaticus. Early diagnosis
of this condition is essential to initiate appropriate
therapy. ABGs can be beneficial in the early assessment
of patients with asthma flares but should not delay
therapy. In the initial stages of an acute asthma exacerbation, it is common for a patient to have respiratory
alkalosis as a result of tachypnea. Acute respiratory acidosis in a patient with known asthma is an ominous sign

482

indicating impending respiratory failure and should
warrant consideration of intubation. The mainstays of
treatment for status asthmaticus include inhaled beta
agonists and IV corticosteroids. Because it can take several hours for these therapies to have their optimal effect, the initial ventilator management in patients with
status asthmaticus can be difficult and often requires
specialized respiratory care services.
C. A detailed medical history including personal, family,
and social history may provide clues that lead to an
appropriate diagnosis. Personal history should include
the age of onset of symptoms, triggers for wheezing, and
aggravating and alleviating conditions. Past medical
history including allergic rhinitis with postnasal drip
symptoms, history of aspiration or conditions that predispose to aspiration, and a history of congestive heart
failure (CHF) should be elicited as potential causes of
wheezing. Smoking status and occupational and home
exposures are also important in determining the cause of
wheezing. A family history of asthma is also suggestive of
a diagnosis of asthma. History of fever and new-onset
sputum production raise the possibility of pneumonia or
viral bronchitis.
D. Noninvasive tests such as radiographic studies and pulmonary function studies are useful in differentiating
the disorders associated with wheezing. Chest radiographs are a simple way to initiate the evaluation of
wheezing. Chest radiographs help diagnose large mass
lesions causing airway obstruction and resulting in
wheezing. Pulmonary function studies are another useful tool for the investigation of wheezing. Spirometry is
used to identify obstruction, defined as FEV1/FVC
(forced expiratory volume in 1 second/forced vital capacity) !70%. Additionally, flow-volume loops can
identify upper airway obstruction and help differentiate
among extrathoracic and intrathoracic, fixed and variable, and obstructive lesions.
(Continued on page 484)

483
Patient with WHEEZING

A Wheezing on

physical examination
Determine degree of
respiratory compromise

C Stable respiratory
status

D Chest x-ray
Cont’d on p 485

B Intubate if
unstable

484
E. Asthma is the most common condition associated with
wheezing. Asthma is a chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) that is associated with inflammation
of the airways leading to reversible airflow obstruction. Asthma is commonly associated with an obstructive pattern on pulmonary function studies that is at
least partially reversible with bronchodilators such as
albuterol. Reversibility of airflow obstruction is defined as a 200 cc and 12% improvement in either
FEV1 or FVC after inhalation of albuterol. Patients
who have a history consistent with asthma and normal
pulmonary function studies can be further studied
with a methacholine bronchoprovocation study. Patients who demonstrate a 20% decline in their FEV1
with the inhalation of methacholine are diagnosed
with asthma. The mainstays of treatment for asthma
include inhaled corticosteroids, inhaled beta agonists,
and leukotriene receptor blockers. Difficult-to-treat
asthma may require systemic corticosteroids. Frequent use of systemic corticosteroids, nocturnal symptoms, emergency department visits, and previous intubations for asthma are all characteristics that suggest
poorly controlled asthma and often portend a poorer
prognosis for asthma outcomes.
F. Incompletely reversible airflow obstruction demonstrated by a reduction in the FEV1/FVC ratio with
minimal or no improvement after inhaled bronchodilator is suggestive of COPD such as chronic bronchitis
and emphysema. A smoking history or chronic sputum
production can suggest these conditions. Early-onset
COPD or a family history of early-onset COPD raises
the suspicion of alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency. This can
be evaluated by measuring alpha-1-antitrypsin levels.
Poorly reversible airflow obstruction in a young patient
with excessive sputum production and bronchiectasis on
CT raises the possibility of cystic fibrosis. Cystic fibrosis
is diagnosed by sweat-chloride testing or genetic studies. Fever and cough can suggest a viral etiology of
wheezing in both patients with no history of lung disease
and in individuals with preexisting COPD. The constellation of symptoms including wheezing, flushing, and
profuse diarrhea is characteristic of carcinoid syndrome,
which is characterized by an elevated urinary 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) level. This is a rare cause of
wheezing.
G. A variety of other atypical conditions can be associated
with wheezing. The diagnosis of wheezing conditions
other than COPD should be considered in all patients
whose initial evaluation is inconsistent with asthma or
when wheezing continues despite conventional asthma
treatment. Postnasal drip is a common cause of wheezing. Postnasal drip causes wheezing from upper airway
inflammation and airway narrowing that most commonly occurs at the level of the vocal cords. Treatment
with inhaled corticosteroids is the treatment of choice

for this condition. Gastroesophageal reflux disease
(GERD) and aspiration are two other conditions often
associated with wheezing. It is important to note that,
whereas GERD has been associated with asthma
exacerbations, reflux is also an independent cause of
wheezing in patients without obstructive pulmonary
diseases. Finally, a variety of interstitial lung diseases
(ILDs) may have wheezing as a component of an
atypical presentation. A CT scan can help with this
diagnosis.
H. Pulmonary embolism (PE) is a less common cause of
wheezing. Contrast-enhanced CT studies can help
make this diagnosis. Patients typically present with
acute-onset dyspnea, which may be associated with
wheezing. Patients are typically found to have sinus
tachycardia but can have patterns of right-sided heart
strain on their echocardiogram. In patients in whom the
diagnosis of pulmonary embolism is entertained and the
renal function is impaired, ventilation/perfusion (V/Q)
scans can help in making the diagnosis of pulmonary
embolism.
I. The wheeze associated with CHF is commonly referred
to as cardiac asthma because it mimics the wheeze
associated with asthma. A history of orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, weight gain, and lower-extremity
edema should raise the possibility of CHF as a potential
etiology of wheezing in certain patients. A transthoracic
echocardiogram is useful in the evaluation of cardiac
function. Diuresis is the therapy for this cause of
wheezing.
J. Invasive diagnostic testing should be reserved for
patients in whom no alternative cause of wheezing has
been determined. Invasive procedures such as bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage, transbronchial or endobronchial biopsies, Wang needle biopsies, mediastinoscopy, CT-guided biopsy, and open-lung biopsy can be
performed when a diagnosis cannot be made by noninvasive means. The ideal invasive, diagnostic approach
can be made in consultation with a pulmonologist,
thoracic surgeon, and interventional radiologist.
References
American Thoracic Society. Committee on Pulmonary Nomenclature.
Am Thorac Soc News 1977;3:6.
Holden DA, Mehta AC. Evaluation of wheezing in the nonasthmatic
patient. Cleve Clin J Med 1990;57:345.
Irwin RS, Pratter MR, Holland PS, et al. Postnasal drip causes cough
and is associated with reversible upper airway obstruction. Chest
1984;85:346.
McKean MC, Leech M, Lambert PC, et al. A model of viral wheeze in
nonasthmatic adults: symptoms and physiology. Eur Respir J
2001;18:23.
Meselier N, Charbonneau G, Racineux JL. Wheezes. Eur Respir J
1995;8:1942.
Miller RD, Hyatt RE. Obstruction lesions of the larynx and trachea:
clinical and physiologic characteristics. Mayo Clin Proc 1969;44:145.
Wong CY, Shum TT, Law GTS, et al. All that wheezes is not asthma.
Hong Kong Med J 2003;9:39–42.

485
Chest x-ray
(Cont’d from p 483)

Normal

Infiltrate

Pulmonary
edema

Spirometry
Fever/sputum
production:
Bacterial pneumonia
Viral wheeze

E Normal FEV1/FVC:
Asthma
Postnasal drip
GERD
Vocal cord
dysfunction
PE
ILD

F Decreased FEV1/FVC:
Asthma
COPD
Bronchitis
Bronchiectasis
Cystic fibrosis

CT scan

G No fever present:

Drug induced
Atypical pneumonitis
PE
Aspiration

H PE or ILD considered

*VATS, Video-assisted thorascopic surgery.

I Treatment of CHF

Mass or
obstructive
lesion

CT scan (with contrast
if concern for PE)

J Diagnostic evaluation:
Bronchoscopy
VATS*
CT-guided biopsy

