WIDE-COMPLEX TACHYCARDIA

Wide QRS complex tachycardia (WCT), defined as heart
rate (HR) !100 beats per minute (bpm) with a QRS duration !120 ms, is a common arrhythmia with potentially
life-threatening consequences, making rapid and accurate
diagnosis with initiation of appropriate therapy essential.
A. After recognition of this arrhythmia, the clinician must
immediately evaluate the patient for hemodynamic
stability. If the patient is unstable, then Advanced Cardiac Life Support (ACLS) protocol should be initiated
with direct current (DC) cardioversion of the patient.
If the rhythm is sustained but tolerated or if it is not
sustained, then the clinician should perform an evaluation with the goal of differentiation between ventricular tachycardia (VT) and supraventricular tachycardia
(SVT) with aberrant conduction. Prognosis and therapy of these two conditions differ considerably.
B. The clinical history can be helpful in suggesting a
diagnosis. Presence of prior myocardial infarction (MI)
and structural heart disease is the strongest clinical predictor of VT. Patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy
and WCT will have VT !98% of the time. Advanced
age and presence of congestive heart failure (CHF) also
favor VT. Younger patients or adults with a history of
recurrent tachycardia since a young age or for !3 years
are more likely to have SVT with aberrancy.
Symptoms during tachycardia may be far ranging,
from malaise to syncope. It is a common misconception
that WCT is less likely to be VT if it is hemodynamically stable. Many VTs are hemodynamically tolerated
and dismissing this diagnosis can lead to inappropriate
triage and therapy, with subsequent cardiovascular
collapse.
After assessment of vital signs, the physical examination should be directed toward noting evidence of
atrioventricular (AV) dissociation, which is frequently
seen in VT but rarely in SVT. Beat-to-beat change in
blood pressure, variability in S1, and cannon A waves
are all signs of AV dissociation. Carotid massage that
terminates the arrhythmia indicates that the AV node
was involved in the tachycardia circuit and that the
mechanism is an SVT.
C. A 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) offers a great deal
more information than a rhythm strip and should be
obtained promptly. A prior ECG can also offer helpful
clues. If there is evidence of ventricular pre-excitation or
previous bundle branch block with similar morphology

64

D.

E.

F.

G.

to the WCT, then it suggests SVT with aberrancy. If
there are Q waves or other evidence of prior MI, the case
for VT is supported.
Initial evaluation of the ECG should begin with the
search for P waves and their relationship to the QRS.
Dissociation of the P from the QRS or other evidence
of AV dissociation, such as fusion or capture beats, is
diagnostic of VT. It should be noted that the rate of the
WCT does not reliably differentiate VT from SVT and
that, although irregularity suggests atrial fibrillation, it
can also be seen at the onset and termination of VT.
If the initial assessment fails to yield a diagnosis,
more detailed analysis is necessary. This is done by
identifying the WCT as right bundle branch block
(RBBB)-type (V1 positive) or left bundle branch
block (LBBB)-type (V1 negative) and applying specific morphologic criteria.
In RBBB-type WCT, a ventricular origin is suggested
by QRS complex duration !140 ms, left axis deviation,
a single (R) or biphasic (QR or RS) R wave in lead V1,
or a triphasic R wave in lead V1 with the initial R wave
taller than the secondary R wave, R:S ratio of "1 in V6,
positive concordance.
In LBBB-type WCT, a ventricular origin is suggested
by QRS complex !160 ms, a broad (!40 ms) R in V1,
notching of the QRS and/or delayed downstroke with
R to S interval !100 ms in V1, right axis deviation, a Q
wave in V6, negative concordance.
Unless there is definitive evidence that the WCT is
SVT, one should never use adenosine or verapamil
because it may lead to rapid hemodynamic collapse.
Procainamide is the preferred agent for pharmacologic control of WCT.

References
Brugada P, Brugada J, Mont L, et al. A new approach to the differential
diagnosis of a regular tachycardia with a wide QRS complex. Circulation
1991;83:1649–1659.
Buxton AE, Marchlinski FE, Doherty JU. Hazards of intravenous
verapamil for sustained ventricular tachycardia. Am J Cardiol
1987;59:1107–1110.
Kindwall E, Brown J, Josephson ME. Electrocardiographic criteria for
ventricular tachycardia in wide QRS complex left bundle-branch block
morphology tachycardia. Am J Cardiol 1988;61:1279–1283.
Stewart RB, Bardy GH, Greene HL. Wide complex tachycardia: misdiagnosis and outcome after emergent therapy. Ann Intern Med
1986;104:766–771.
Wellens HJJ. Ventricular tachycardia: diagnosis of broad QRS complex
tachycardia. Heart 2001;86:579–585.

65
Patient with WIDE-COMPLEX TACHYCARDIA

A Assess hemodynamic stability

Unstable

Stable

B History and

DC Cardioversion

physical examination

D

Favors VT:
History of coronary artery
disease/MI/CHF
Advancing age (!35)
C Obtain 12-lead ECG
Favors SVT:
Younger age ("35)
Recurrent symptoms for
Evidence of AV dissociation?
!3 yr

No

Yes
VT

E Differentiate between

F V1 positive (RBBB)
Favors VT:
QRS duration !140 ms
Left axis deviation "#30°
V1: absence of normal rSR’
morphology
V6: R:S ratio "1
Positive concordance

LBBB- and RBBB-type
patterns and apply
morphologic analysis

G V1 negative (LBBB)
Favors VT:
QRS duration !160 ms
Right axis deviation !90°
V1: broad R !40 ms, delayed
R to S duration !100 ms
V6: any Q wave
Negative concordance

