A. Significant abnormal vaginal bleeding not emanating from the uterus is uncommon and usually is discerned from a careful history and physical examination. The initial assessment should exclude genitourinary (hematuria) and GI (hematochezia) etiologies, allowing one to concentrate on genital etiologies, predominantly uterine. Abnormal perimenarchal and early perimenopausal bleeding usually is hormonally mediated, although bleeding characteristics may vary widely. Conversely, late perimenopausal and postmenopausal bleeding is more likely to be related to a neoplastic process that is not necessarily malignant. Women at high risk for genital tract cancer can be identified through a detailed obstetric, gynecologic, and medical history (endocrine disorders, pituitary tumors, and blood dyscrasias) that includes menstrual history, contraceptive use, exposure to sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), history of premalignant conditions of the cervix or uterus, human papillomavirus (HPV) infection, obesity, and preexisting malignancy.
B. The complete physical examination permits exclusion of extragenital tract etiologies, although they lend further support to a potential endocrine or hematologic cause if thyromegaly or diffuse petechiae are present. Pelvic examination is essential to localize the source of bleeding through identification of lesions or other significant pathologic conditions (i.e., polyps, uterine fibroids, or pelvic masses). The Pap smear, obtained before bimanual examination, is essential in screening for cervical cancer and occasionally suggests the presence of cervicitis or higher genital tract neoplasias. Collect appropriate cultures in patients identified by history to be at significant risk for STDs. Test all women of reproductive age for pregnancy, regardless of menstrual history, by urine human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) testing because pregnancy is the most common cause of abnormal vaginal bleeding. When bleeding is significant or persistent, obtain a CBC to determine anemia and rule out coagulopathies or occult hematologic malignancies. Other testing is dictated by the history and physical examination, including various endocrine, coagulation, and imaging studies. Transvaginal ultrasound is invaluable in the evaluation and management of these patients. In addition to adnexal and ovarian assessment, evaluate the myometrium for fibroids and the endometrium for its thickness. In postmenopausal women, an endometrial thickness of <5 mm generally is considered the upper limit of normal. In premenopausal women, endometrial thickness varies from 4-8 mm in the follicular phase and 7–14 mm in the secretory phase. Saline infusion sonohysterography, in which saline is infused into the endometrial cavity before sonography, has led to better definition of cavitary lesions (e.g., submucosal fibroids, uterine polyps) and is further expanding the indications for pelvic sonography.
C. Focus first on the source of the bleeding. The necessary equipment (including specula of various sizes and shapes), flexible lighting, and adequate assistance must be available. If a lesion is identified in the genital tract, obtain a biopsy regardless of the patient's age.
D. Abnormal bleeding in premenopausal women often is attributable to contraceptive methods. In addition to oral contraceptive pills, Depo-Provera is associated with abnormal bleeding in the first 3–9 months of use. In the absence of an obvious cause, the etiology is most likely “dysfunctional uterine bleeding,” a diagnosis of exclusion. The cause of bleeding in patients using hormonal contraception is excess or insufficient estrogen or progesterone. Depending on the patient's wishes, therapeutic options include receiving no additional therapy, discontinuing or changing to a new contraceptive method, or adding some hormonal manipulation. Lack of an organic explanation for persistent abnormal bleeding refractory to hormonal manipulation should prompt further evaluation of the uterine cavity, in the form of transvaginal sonography with or without saline infusion, office hysteroscopy, or endometrial biopsy (EMB). In patients at risk for hyperplasia, EMB may be sufficient, although more and more physicians choose direct visualization by sonography or hysteroscopy.
E. The incidence of adenocarcinoma of the uterus in women >40 years is about 5%. The incidence increases with age. Therefore, abnormal bleeding in women who are 40 years must be evaluated by EMB. Women at increased risk because of obesity, chronic anovulation, exogenous unopposed estrogen, or preexisting cancer (particularly breast cancer) may warrant EMB regardless of age. In postmenopausal women who use hormone replacement therapy, a diligent evaluation is indicated to rule out occult carcinoma. When histopathologic study reveals hyperplasia with cellular atypia, medical or surgical treatment is necessary. Treatment of endometrial carcinoma should involve consultation with a gynecologist or oncologist to determine the best course of therapy. Reevaluate patients diagnosed with hyperplasia with atypia for persistent or worsening hyperplasia within 3–6 months of treatment.

