Acute confusional states encompass a range of clinical syndromes, variably labeled as encephalopathy or delirium. The dominant clinical sign is inattention. Nearly all other cognitive functions will also appear to be impaired, but this is usually attributable to the attentional deficit. The most common causes of acute confusional states are systemic medical conditions, such as infectious processes, metabolic derangements, toxins, and the effects of medications. Some primary pathologies of the brain can produce acute confusional states, as may primary psychiatric illnesses that impair attention and concentration. A patient presenting with acute confusion should be evaluated emergently and monitored intensively; confusion may herald serious pathologic processes that can lead rapidly to compromised vital function, coma, and death.

A. The critical keys to the diagnosis of most acute confusional states can be found in the history, but most patients will be unable to provide useful information themselves. Thus, it is essential to attempt to obtain as much collateral history as possible, ideally from family members or friends, but additionally from medical personnel or others. In hospitalized patients, chart review may provide important clues to the timing of onset or possible etiologies, such as medications. Next, clinical examination and laboratory testing are crucial, followed in many cases by neuroimaging or other studies. The mental status examination should focus on attentional and arousal systems, and should attempt to provide semiquantitative information for the record that can be used as a comparison against which to judge clinical decline or improvement. Tests that the patient is unable to perform are typically less useful than tests that can be performed, at least in part. The Mini-Mental State Exam is often not particularly useful in this setting. Rather, simple bedside attentional tests may be helpful, such as a continuous performance test in which the patient is asked to remember a single letter (e.g., “A”) and to raise a finger when that letter is heard. The examiner then states a series of random letters, approximately one per second, and observes the patient's responses, noting the number of targets (A's) missed and the number of foils (non-A letters) endorsed. Other useful tests include the timed recitation of days of the week or months of the year-first forward and then backward. Observe for easy distractibility (due to externally or internally generated stimuli, possibly suggesting hallucinations) or perseveration. The neurologic examination can be particularly valuable in providing etiologic clues; for example, metabolic derangements may induce signs that accompany confusion, such as asterixis or myoclonus. Focal neurologic signs such as hemiparesis, visual-field defects, asymmetric reflexes, an upgoing toe, or hemineglect suggest the presence of focal brain lesions, which may produce confusional states (e.g., posterior cerebral or right middle cerebral artery infarcts). Laboratory tests and neuroimaging or other studies often provide critical information in this setting.
B. Focal brain lesions of various etiologies may present with acute confusional states. Confusion and agitation may result from focal pathology in right frontal and parietal lobes, unilateral medial temporal lobe lesions in either hemisphere, or midbrain-diencephalic lesions. Ischemic cerebral infarcts of tissue supplied by middle cerebral arteries (usually right), posterior cerebral arteries, or the basilar artery may cause acute confusional states, sometimes with minimal or no accompanying focal neurologic signs. Mass lesions of different types (e.g., tumor, subdural hematoma, intracerebral hemorrhage, abscess) may produce similar clinical features. In many cases involving mass lesions or midbrain-diencephalic pathology, there is an accompanying alteration in arousal.
C. Other primary cerebral processes may present with confusional states. Patients with mild traumatic brain injury may exhibit transient loss of consciousness (i.e., concussion), with or without residual problems with attention, concentration, and memory (post-concussion syndrome). More significant brain injury (e.g., contusion) may produce permanent deficits; the profile of cognitive deficits depends on the areas involved. Severe head injury may result in coma, and evaluation and treatment should proceed according to intensive care protocols (see the section Coma). In older patients, subdural hematoma may result from trivial head trauma. In young patients, migraine may present with confusion with or without headache or other focal neurologic findings.
D. Acute confusion may be the presenting sign of systemic or CNS infection. In febrile confusional states, aggressive workup for infectious etiologies is key, yet infectious etiologies must be kept in mind even when a fever is not obviously present, particularly in older patients or those with immunologic compromise (including patients with an oncologic history). Bacterial and viral agents are more likely to cause acute behavior changes than fungal agents, which tend to produce a more indolent course of symptoms. Empiric treatment of herpes simplex encephalitis should be strongly considered in most febrile confusional states until other etiologies can be identified, because significant permanent neurologic impairment may be preventable. Also consider CNS abscesses whether or not focal signs are present. In older patients, common systemic infections such as urinary tract infection may induce significant confusion, which may persist longer that expected after treatment. A low clinical threshold for lumbar puncture must be maintained.
E. Confusional states may be secondary to metabolic derangements resulting from systemic illness. The potential causes are numerous and include thyroid and other endocrine, hepatic, renal, and pulmonary dysfunction. Any condition leading to hypoxia, such as myocardial infarction or cardiac arrhythmia, may lead to a confusional state. Along with a history and neurologic examination, a general medical examination surveying all organ systems is essential in the initial evaluation of a patient with acute confusion. Patients with a history of dementia often develop acutely worsened mental status during periods of intercurrent systemic illness. Treatment of the underlying cause is the primary intervention, but confusion may resolve slowly, particularly in older individuals.
F. Exogenous substances may cause a toxic confusional state. Medications (particularly those with prominent anticholinergic effects) may adversely affect cognitive function. Neuroleptic malignant syndrome must be considered in patients receiving these medications or in patients withdrawn rapidly from levodopa or dopamine agonists. A toxicology screen will reveal drugs of abuse or other agents. Acute confusional syndromes in patients who use alcohol include intoxication, withdrawal, and Wernicke's encephalopathy (classically ophthalmoplegia, ataxia, and encephalopathy, but often presenting without the full triad). The administration of thiamine prior to glucose is essential. Other toxic agents include organic chemical substances (e.g., insecticides), heavy metals, and carbon monoxide.
G. Consider postictal confusion in a patient with a known seizure disorder. Anticonvulsant medication effects-particularly abruptly increased levels due to drug-drug interactions may cause confusion. Alterations in consciousness may result from absence or complex partial seizures. Although relatively uncommon, nonconvulsive status epilepticus should always be considered in confused patients with or without a seizure history. If the diagnosis is in doubt, treat with benzodiazepines and obtain an urgent EEG, if available.
H. Patients with known psychiatric disorders may present with confusion or inattention. The effects of psychiatric medications must always be considered in this setting.

