Thromboembolic disorders and medical procedures that may require anticoagulation therapy include proximal deep venous thrombosis (DVT), pulmonary embolism (PE), atrial fibrillation with embolism, acute myocardial infarction, acute coronary syndrome, and placement of mechanical heart valves. In situations of apparent thromboembolic disorders (as opposed to prophylaxis) that are potentially life threatening (e.g., PE with shock), initiate heparin therapy before performing diagnostic tests.
A. Diagnostic tests vary in sensitivity and specificity. In patients with PE, a high degree of clinical suspicion may necessitate therapy even when the helical CT scan or ventilation-perfusion scan is inconclusive or negative.
B. Contraindications to heparin are relative: The risks must be weighed against the potential benefits. In most cases, patients with previous hypersensitivity or heparin-induced thrombocytopenia; active bleeding; intracranial hemorrhage; GI bleeding; hemophilia; thrombocytopenia; severe hypertension; or recent surgery of the brain, spinal cord, or eye should not receive heparin therapy. In patients with PE in whom there are contraindications to heparin therapy, consider placement of an inferior vena cava (IVC) filter.
C. In patients with massive PE or those with hemodynamic compromise, consider thrombolytic therapy with urokinase or tissue plasminogen activator (TPA). However, clinical trials have shown no clear advantage of thrombolytic therapy over heparin in most patients with venous thromboembolism.
D. Several studies show that a weight-based approach to administering heparin achieves more rapid anticoagulation without increased risk of bleeding. Many institutions have developed heparin-dosing protocols to facilitate the appropriate use of heparin. However, use of such protocols does not obviate the need for close clinical and laboratory monitoring by the physician. Check partial thromboplastin time (PTT) no sooner than 6 hours after any bolus; PTT checked sooner may be falsely elevated. The PTT target for heparin therapy must be based on values derived by individual laboratories. Many laboratories now standardize the PTT assay based on heparin levels. The PTT-based dose changes must be based on local laboratory standards, and published protocol can serve only as a guide.
E. A variety of low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) products such as enoxaparin have been marketed. These agents appear to be at least as effective as unfractionated heparin (UFH), do not require PTT monitoring, and can be administered by intermittent SC injection. However, these products are much more expensive than UFH and offer no particular advantage in the patient who is hospitalized. Several studies show that LMWH can be administered safely to outpatients with DVT or PE. A patient who is medically stable and has the appropriate home environment and insurance coverage may be discharged on LMWH (e.g., enoxaparin 1 mg/kg SC q12h or 1.5 mg/kg q24h). Such therapy is continued until the level of long-term anticoagulation (warfarin) is therapeutic.
F. If long-term anticoagulation is indicated and there are no contraindications to warfarin, initiate warfarin as soon as the PTT is therapeutic. The initial warfarin dose should be the same as the expected maintenance dose. There is no pharmacologic rationale for, and there is no outcome evidence supporting, the use of warfarin “loading” doses. Continue heparin therapy for at least 4 days after the initiation of warfarin. Earlier increases in the prothrombin time/International Normalized Ratio (PT/INR) result primarily from depletion of factor VII. Patients are not truly anticoagulated until significant depletion of factors II and X has occurred.

