A. The acute abdomen refers to any condition requiring an “acute” medical decision. The potential causes of acute abdominal pain in women are multiple. A thorough history can quickly eliminate a number of these. Information about menstrual cycles, previous episodes of similar pain, sexual activity, contraception, vaginal discharge, and changes in bowel, bladder, or appetite can quickly narrow the differential diagnosis. Findings in the acute abdomen often include severe pain, which may be caused by infection, bleeding, infarction of tissue, or obstruction of a hollow viscus (bowel, fallopian tube, or ureter). Any of these conditions can irritate and inflame the peritoneum, making it sensitive to movement. Loss of appetite, nausea, and vomiting often accompany the pain and tenderness. Laboratory studies necessary for adequately evaluating an acute abdomen include a CBC with differential, ESR, pregnancy test (urine or serum), urinalysis, and occasionally an amylase or lipase. Obtain cervical cultures for *Neisseria gonorrhoeae* and *Chlamydia trachomatis* at initial evaluation if the history warrants.
B. If the pregnancy test is positive, the differential diagnosis can be narrowed considerably. It is important to recognize that conditions other than pregnancy can be the source of the pain. If gestational age is <10-12 weeks, consider ectopic pregnancy, rupture or torsion of ovarian cyst, or septic or threatened abortion. If gestational age is >12–14 weeks, ectopic pregnancy becomes less likely; consider other entities, such as ruptured or torsed adnexa, appendicitis, septic abortion, ureteral colic, and pyelonephritis.
C. Ultrasonography continues to expand its role in the evaluation of obstetric and gynecologic patients with abdominal pain. Its use in conjunction with quantitative beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) can be important. With normal pregnancy, a gestational sac often is seen at 5–6 weeks of gestation. When the β-hCG level reaches 6500 mIU/ml, an abdominal scan can visualize a gestational sac; at 1500 mIU/ml a transvaginal probe often visualizes the pregnancy. If, on the basis of sonographic findings and quantitative β-hCG values, the possibility of an ectopic pregnancy still exists, the patient needs referral for possible surgical management (laparoscopy/laparotomy) or medical management (e.g., methotrexate) for an ectopic pregnancy. If an early intrauterine pregnancy is confirmed by sonography, other sources for the pain must be determined. Ruptured or torsed ovarian cysts, appendicitis, or an infected abortion also can present with abdominal pain.
D. If the pregnancy test is negative, history again plays an important role. Patients with a history of recurrent cyclic pain related to menses and who now have an acute exacerbation may have a ruptured endometrioma. Patients with a history of fever, chills, and vaginal discharge with a recent change in sexual partners are at risk for pelvic inflammatory disease (PID). (Patients taking oral contraceptives are at decreased risk for ovarian cyst formation.) If an infectious cause is determined, admit the patient for IV antibiotics; if no improvement is seen in 24-48 hours, consider laparoscopy. CT may be helpful in the evaluation of the patient because it is both specific and sensitive for appendicitis. On occasion, however, the determination of PID versus appendicitis often is not resolved until laparoscopy or laparotomy is performed. Other entities that must always be considered are adnexal torsion, ovarian cyst rupture, exacerbation of endometriosis, degenerating fibroid, renal calculi, and mesenteric lymphadenitis.
E. Although many imaging modalities are available to the practitioner, the choice may need to be made in concert with the radiologist. A thin pregnant patient can be evaluated well with ultrasound; in obese postmenopausal patients more information may be obtained by CT. The need for surgical exploration often takes precedence over imaging studies. Many of the disorders in premenopausal patients apply also to postmenopausal patients. Cyst formation occurs infrequently in elderly patients, but its appearance must be evaluated carefully for the possibility of malignancy. Other processes that can cause acute pain include colonic diverticulitis (75% of these resolve with proper attention and antibiotics), bowel obstruction (most of these need exploration), and vascular lesions (mesenteric thrombosis), dissecting or leaking aneurysm, and acute cholecystitis or pancreatitis.

