A. In the evaluation of a patient with potential vascular emergency, the history and physical examination are extremely important because time of onset and situation leading to the ischemia often influence the type and urgency of treatment. In the absence of trauma, acute lower extremity ischemia may occur for myriad reasons, including myocardial infarction (MI), ventricular aneurysm, valvular heart disease, arrhythmia, or arterial occlusive disease. It is important to establish any history of vascular disease, including cardiac, and whether previous vascular occlusive disease has been diagnosed or vascular reconstructive operations have been performed in the past.
B. Abrupt onset of severe unremitting pain is the classic symptom of acute ischemia, although in patients with a known history of vascular occlusive disease of the lower extremities, pain may be less severe if collaterals have formed. In general, ischemic pain is severe and requires copious opioid analgesia for even moderate relief. The classic physical finding is of a cool pale extremity with absent or extremely weak pulses. Although pulselessness can often be obvious in its presentation, patients may present with progressive symptoms of claudication that has led to acute ischemia. These patients may present in a quiescent manner with minimal physical findings. The findings of paresthesia and paralysis are late findings and usually predict a poor outcome.
C. The etiology of true acutely absent pulses is usually trauma, embolism, or thrombosis. In patients with a history of a revascularization procedure, thrombosis of the bypass conduit or stent is the most common cause of acute ischemia.
D. In a patient with acutely absent pulse and the sudden onset of symptoms, it may be difficult to differentiate thrombosis from embolism as the cause of the ischemia. Thrombosis tends to occur more often in younger patients than in patients with embolism and in patients with a known history of vascular occlusive disease or previous vascular surgery. Embolism usually occurs more commonly in patients with known heart disease (mitral stenosis or regurgitation, atrial fibrillation, acute MI). Patients with embolism may have had an earlier embolic event but usually have no history of chronic circulatory impairment.