A. Prior to lumbar puncture (LP) brain imaging is recommended to rule out a mass lesion for patients with focal neurologic deficits, abnormal level of consciousness, papilledema, seizure in the past 7 days, or history of CNS disease (mass, stroke, or infection) or for those who are immunocompromised. Brain herniation after LP remains a rare event.
B. If imaging is indicated, blood cultures should be drawn and steroids and antibiotics should be administered before imaging to prevent delay in treatment. Antibiotics should be administered emergently (within 30 minutes) in any patient with suspected bacterial meningitis.
C. If CNS imaging reveals a mass lesion, neurosurgical evaluation may be indicated. Radiologic evidence of temporal lobe abnormalities should be treated empirically as herpes simplex encephalitis pending diagnostic confirmation.
D. Dexamethasone administered at 0.15 mg/kg is recommended in adults with moderate to severe impairment (Glasgow Coma Scale score <12) and suspicion of pneumococcal disease. It should be given just prior to or concomitant with IV antibiotic therapy; it is thought to protect against inflammatory response to bacteria inside the subarachnoid space. Dexamethasone should not be administered after antibiotics have already been given.
E. Antibiotics should be administered empirically and without delay. Antibiotic regimens can be revised once information from the history, physical examination, and the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) Gram stain is available.
F. In normal adult hosts ≤60 years, the most common organisms are Streptococcus pneumoniae, Neisseria meningitidis, and (more rarely) Haemophilus influenzae. In patients >60 years, S. pneumoniae predominates, but Listeria monocytogenes and group B streptococcus are also seen in this age group.
G. In patients who are immunocompromised, including patients with HIV/AIDS, cancer, end-stage renal disease, alcoholism, and diabetes, and in patients taking high-dose steroids, additional organisms should be considered. These include Cryptococcus neoformans, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Staphylococcus species, and aerobic gram-negative bacilli, including Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
H. Closed head trauma and basilar skull fractures are linked to infections with S. pneumoniae and gram-negative bacilli. Neurosurgical procedures increase risk for meningitis from Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa, but coagulase-negative Staphylococcus species, Streptococcus, and aerobic gram-negative bacilli have also been implicated. Upper respiratory flora should be suspected after invasive sinus instrumentation.
I. Intraventricular shunt devices are at high risk of causing infection. The most common organism is Staphylococcus epidermidis; other skin flora, including S. aureus, diphtheroids, and Propionibacterium acnes are also frequent culprits.
J. The Gram stain should be used to target antimicrobial therapy. If the organism identified is not S. pneumoniae, dexamethasone can be discontinued. CSF cultures should be sent to confirm the diagnosis. Blood cultures will also be positive in 50%–75% of patients with bacterial meningitis.
K. If no bacteria are seen on Gram stain, other organisms should be considered. Cryptococcal meningitis should be investigated with India ink stain, cryptococcal antigen testing, and fungal cultures. Only 75% of CSF samples infected with Cryptococcus will have positive India ink stains; however, serum and CSF cryptococcal antigen detection has >95% sensitivity. The gold standard remains fungal culture.
L. If Cryptococcus is not present, and if CSF glucose levels are normal and CSF is without significant leukocytes, consider a parameningeal focus.
M. Polymorphonuclear leukocytes in the CSF may indicate partially treated bacterial meningitis or a viral meningitis. Empiric antimicrobials should be continued and viral studies, such as enterovirus polymerase chain reaction (PCR), should be done on the CSF sample.
N. In patients with predominantly monocytic white cells in the CSF, a decreased glucose level should prompt consideration for tuberculous meningitis. Partially treated bacterial or fungal meningitis remains a possibility. A monocytic CSF with normal glucose is more indicative of viral infection. PCR sent on CSF can elucidate common viral entities that cause meningitis.
O. Tuberculous meningitis can be an elusive diagnosis. CSF acid-fast bacilli smear is key, as is culture sent from 10 ml of spun CSF sediment. Empiric therapy must be considered in patients with risk factors because culture results can take up to 6 weeks.

