A. The general evaluation of anemia includes an initial evaluation of volume status. If clinical signs of intravascular volume depletion such as orthostatic hypotension are present, RBC and plasma loss may have occurred. Correct intravascular volume before evaluating the patient for anemia.
B. Begin evaluation of the pathophysiology of anemia by assessing effective RBC production. The normal steady-state reticulocyte production is approximately 50,000/mm³ per day (1% of 5 million), and the maximum production is approximately 400,000/mm³. Under extreme stress, reticulocytes may be released from the marrow a day early, and even higher levels of apparent production are achieved. These figures may be used to interpret whether RBC production is increased or decreased.
C. Increased RBC production in a patient with anemia is presumptive evidence of increased RBC destruction (hemolysis). The hemolysis may be intravascular or predominantly extravascular. In either case, haptoglobin, the major plasma heme-binding protein, may be depressed. In intravascular hemolysis, free hemoglobin (Hb) may be present in plasma and iron (Fe) may be in renal tubule cells (urinary hemosiderin). Indirect bilirubin and lactate dehydrogenase may also be elevated. The Coombs' test is used to distinguish immune and nonimmune hemolysis. A positive, direct Coombs' test indicates antibody or complement on the RBC cell surface. Only certain IgG isotypes react with macrophage Fc receptors; therefore, a positive Coombs' test may be present without causing increased RBC destruction. Autoimmune antibodies have maximal binding at either 37° C (warm antibodies, usually IgG) or 4° C (cold antibodies, usually IgM).
D. If the spleen is palpable and thus clinically enlarged, hypersplenism cannot be definitively ruled out as a cause of RBC destruction. This can occur secondary to processes that themselves lead to anemia, such as the ineffective erythropoiesis accompanying thalassemia and hemolysis from an abnormal Hb, such as sickle cell/C disease.
E. If hypersplenism is unlikely, hemolysis may be a result of mechanical trauma, congenital enzyme, or Hb defects within the RBC. Microangiopathic hemolytic anemia (MAHA) results from RBC trauma from fibrin strands in small vessels (thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, hemolytic uremic syndrome, disseminated intravascular coagulation [DIC]), or more rarely, prosthetic heart valves. Enzymatic defects can be drug dependent, such as G6PD deficiency, or constitutive, such as pyruvate kinase deficiency. Abnormal Hbs (sickle hemoglobin) and membrane defects (hereditary spherocytosis) also cause hemolysis. Acquired causes of hemolysis include the excess complement sensitivity acquired in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) and infections such as malaria.
F. When RBC production is decreased or normal in the face of anemia (normal production with a reduced RBC mass constitutes depressed production), guidance as to the origin of the anemia may be provided by RBC size obtained through automated cell counting. Microcytic anemias generally involve processes in which Hb or heme synthesis is impaired. Thalassemia minor is a common cause of microcytic anemia. Major thalassemias cause more severe anemia and often are accompanied by organomegaly and/or skeletal abnormalities caused by marrow expansion. Anemia of chronic disease is the most common anemia in hospitalized patients; can be mildly microcytic (mean cell volume ≥75); and shows reduced serum Fe, reduced total iron-binding capacity (TIBC), and increased serum ferritin. In contrast, Fe deficiency is the most common outpatient anemia and is characterized by reduced serum Fe, increased TIBC, and reduced serum ferritin.
G. In normocytic anemias, consider anemia of chronic disease in appropriate clinical settings when the aforementioned laboratory findings are present. If anemia of chronic disease is absent, order a bone marrow aspiration and biopsy to rule out a marrow defect in RBC production resulting from aplasia, processes replacing the marrow (myelophthisic anemia), lymphoproliferative or myeloproliferative disorders, or malnutrition. Protein calorie malnutrition causes anemia in disorders such as anorexia nervosa. Other metabolic disorders also cause severe anemia, including uremia. The primary defect in patients with uremia is a relative lack of the erythroid-stimulating hormone erythropoietin (EPO), which may now be substantially corrected by EPO administration. The Fe status of these patients depends on their transfusion and medication histories.
H. Macrocytic anemias result from either vitamin deficiencies or primary processes involving the marrow. Liver disease also can cause macrocytosis because of excess RBC membrane lipid, but it is not associated with vitamin deficiency. Vitamin B12 deficiency may be a result of pernicious anemia or secondary to other causes of B12 malabsorption, but it is almost never a result of dietary deficiency. In recent years, many early cases of B12 deficiency have been detected by serum B12 assays and confirmatory tests (increased serum methylmalonic acid or homocysteine). Folate deficiency usually is a result of dietary deficiency or diet in combination with ethanol ingestion. Some drugs also impair folate absorption (phenytoin) or metabolism (trimethoprim).
I. When folate and B12 levels are normal, macrocytic anemias often result from myelodysplasia or unusual congenital dyserythropoietic anemias (types 1, 2, or 3) diagnosed by bone marrow examination.

