A. Anorexia (loss of appetite) often is clinically difficult to differentiate from weight loss without an effect of appetite. However, the diagnostic considerations and workup usually are the same for both clinical problems. Perform a careful history and physical examination, including medication history, social history, and psychological screening examination. The causes of anorexia and weight loss may be divided into five major groups: (1) medical conditions, (2) psychological conditions, (3) social factors, (4) age-related factors, and (5) anorexia nervosa and related eating disorders.
B. A medication and treatment profile on patients with anorexia is of utmost importance because it can identify an easily treated cause. The medications listed are commonly associated with anorexia, especially in elderly patients. Therapeutic measures such as radiotherapy (RT) to the mouth or neck region can alter taste and smell and depress appetite.
C. Perform a head CT or MRI scan in patients who have anorexia with suspected CNS disease. Symptoms of visual disturbance, headaches, or signs of increased intracranial pressure (e.g., papilledema or cranial nerve involvement) should alert one to a potential CNS cause. Consider CNS tumors, especially hypothalamic tumors.
D. Several GI disorders can cause anorexia and/or weight loss. Malabsorption syndromes can mimic eating disorders (e.g., parasitic diseases, inflammatory bowel disease, celiac sprue, pancreatic insufficiency). Laboratory findings that can help differentiate organic disease from eating disorders are leukocytosis, steatorrhea, fever, hematochezia, and histologic or radiographic findings typical of certain GI disease states. Malignancy involving the GI tract can cause weight loss by several mechanisms: oral cavity pain or swallowing difficulty, esophageal obstruction or motility problems, gastric outlet obstruction, bowel obstruction, biliary disease, pancreatitis, mesenteric ischemia, and abdominal pain. Distant metastases of GI malignancies also can produce anorexia or weight loss by several mechanisms.
E. Social and cultural factors play an important role in the attitudes and behaviors of eating and body image. These factors are important components in the complex etiology of eating disorders. Other factors, such as difficulty with food acquisition and social isolation, can be important in some patients, especially the elderly.
F. Dementia and depression may cause significant weight loss. These are more commonly seen in the elderly and are important considerations because these disorders are potentially treatable. All cases of depression should be treated and reversible causes for dementia should be sought. Alcoholism is a common cause of anorexia and weight loss. Obtain a careful alcohol and drug abuse history in all cases.
G. Normal physiologic changes in the elderly may cause anorexia and weight loss. Hypogeusia (diminished sense of taste) and decreased olfactory function may result in food being less desirable. Visual and hearing problems may interfere with the usual mealtime socialization and may cause social isolation. Visual disorders and other physical disabilities may interfere with food preparation.
H. Anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa are eating disorders that affect 1%-4% of women and are rarely found in men. These disorders usually are diagnosed in the second or third decades, but reports of diagnosis in older persons are increasing. Anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa result from complex interactions of physiologic, psychological, and sociocultural dysfunction. Diagnostic criteria for these eating disorders used by most authors are those found in the DSM-IV of the American Psychiatric Association. Patient history reveals intense fear of fatness, disturbed perception of body image, and an obsessional desire to lose weight. Patients with bulimia nervosa classically have binge eating commonly associated with self-induced vomiting, abuse of cathartics or diuretics, and fear of loss of control over eating. Treatment of these disorders is complex and should follow a team approach, with a primary care physician managing medical care and coordinating treatment by psychiatric/psychological and nutritional consultants. Many medical complications may result from eating disorders; treatment of these should have priority.

