A commonly used classification system categorizes surgical procedures as clean, clean-contaminated, contaminated, or dirty, based on predicted postoperative site infection rates; rates of infection are generally <2% for clean and about 40% for dirty procedures. However, infection rates for the same operation may vary at different institutions; physician- and institution-specific rates should be recorded and used in the consideration of prophylaxis. Other factors predictive of postoperative infection, including risks within particular categories, are described elsewhere (see Mangram et al.). In addition to the antimicrobials listed in the decision tree, mechanical bowel cleansing (e.g., oral polyethylene glycol solution, sodium phosphate with or without bisacodyl) is routinely used the day before elective colorectal surgery. For penetrating abdominal trauma, prophylaxis is indicated because the exact site and extent of injury cannot be determined until surgery. Treatment, not prophylaxis, is needed for dirty surgical procedures. Although guidelines usually state that treatment is also needed for contaminated procedures (e.g., colon injury with delayed surgery), prophylaxis may suffice in selected cases (e.g., minor break in technique with prompt lavage). Local antimicrobial prophylaxis with irrigations, impregnated beads or cement, and bonded grafts may provide protection equivalent to IV prophylaxis in some types of surgery, but well-designed trials are needed before recommendations can be made with confidence. Do not base the decision to use antimicrobial prophylaxis solely on postoperative wound infection rates. Total hip replacement is classified as a clean operative procedure according to most criteria, but a postoperative infection of the prosthesis may be catastrophic. Hence, a clinically significant decrease in the incidence of an unacceptable complication may be sufficient justification for prophylaxis. Cefazolin is the standard with which other antimicrobials (e.g., cefuroxime) should be compared for clean surgical procedures. Cefazolin is inexpensive, has a moderately long half-life, has a spectrum against most predominant pathogens, and has demonstrated activity in clinical trials. Clindamycin or vancomycin may be used instead of cefazolin in patients with β-lactam allergies. Additionally, vancomycin may be used for surgery involving prosthetic materials or devices (including total hip replacement) if a high rate of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus or epidermidis infection has been documented, but its use is not indicated for routine prophylaxis, given the concern of vancomycin-resistant bacteria. Antimicrobials with aerobic and anaerobic activity (e.g., cefoxitin, cefotetan, cefazolin plus metronidazole; gentamicin plus clindamycin) are indicated for prophylaxis when mixed pathogens are common (i.e., clean-contaminated procedures). In colorectal surgery it is unclear whether IV antimicrobials with combined aerobic/anaerobic activity provide benefits beyond mechanical cleansing and oral antimicrobial prophylaxis, but the IV agent is often added. Give IV antimicrobials within 60 minutes (120 minutes for vancomycin or ciprofloxacin) of the first incision to ensure adequate concentrations. Additional doses of the antimicrobial may be needed during extended procedures, depending on its pharmacokinetic properties (e.g., a second dose of cefazolin should be given 4 hours and cefoxitin should be given 2 hours from the start of an operation). With the possible exceptions of cardiothoracic procedures, there is little benefit from antimicrobial administration beyond 24 hours from the first surgical incision (unless treatment, not prophylaxis, is indicated).