Since the beginning of the AIDS epidemic in the United States approximately 1.6 million patients have been diagnosed with HIV. For over a decade the number of new infections reported annually has remained stable at 40,000 per year. However, the incidence of infection has risen in certain populations, including men who have sex with men, Blacks, Hispanics, and women. Health care practitioners must remain acutely aware of the possibility of new HIV infection and take steps to counsel and test their patients appropriately.
A. Pretest and posttest counseling are critical steps in the evaluation for HIV infection. Pretest counseling should include a description of the blood test, limitations of the test, discussion of high-risk behaviors, risk-reduction counseling, differences between HIV and AIDS, implications of a positive test, and available interventions and treatments. When a test result is obtained, counseling should continue. If the patient's test is positive, then issues such as stigma and disclosure should be discussed. Patients should be advised to inform previous sexual partners of their HIV status. Counseling must also include discussion of adherence to safe sexual practices, use of condoms, avoidance of drugs that disinhibit behavior, and arrangements for follow-up medical care. Patients should also be referred to community resources for supportive counseling.
B. Diagnosis of chronic HIV infection should be made using standard enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) tests. If a patient has HIV infection and is beyond the "window period” (the time after infection has occurred but before evidence of HIV infection is detectable—approximately 6 weeks), then the ELISA test should be obtained. The sensitivity and specificity of this test are estimated to be >98%. If the test is positive, it should be confirmed with a Western Blot, which detects the presence of serologic reactivity to individual viral antigens. The specificity of this test is >99%. Rapid HIV antibody testing has also been approved by the FDA. Confirmatory Western blot testing is still required when rapid-testing kits are used.
C. A detailed history should be obtained. Approximate time and source of infection should be obtained. Particular focus should be placed on risk of co-infection with hepatitis B or C; current sexual activity; substance abuse history; diagnosis and treatment of sexually transmitted diseases (STDs); past medical history of opportunistic infections, including tuberculosis and purified protein derivative (PPD) status; current medications, including herbal supplements; family history of cardiovascular disease and diabetes; most recent Pap smear results (for women); and history of immunizations. Past history of travel to areas endemic for histoplasmosis and coccidioidomycosis may also be relevant.
D. An HIV-focused review of systems is critical. Review of systems should include fatigue, weight loss, anorexia, depression, fever, chills, night sweats, adenopathy, skin rash or bruising, headaches, sinus or ear pain, visual changes, oral sores, odynophagia, dysphagia, shortness of breath, dyspnea on exertion, cough, abdominal pain, diarrhea, genital-rectal sores or pain, arthritis, muscle weakness, forgetfulness, and lack of coordination.
E. A complete physical examination for the newly diagnosed HIV positive patient must include a funduscopic examination (risk of cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection in patients with CD4 <50 cells/mm³), evaluation of the oropharynx for oral candidiasis or oral hairy leukoplakia, skin, lymph nodes, genital and anal region, and neurologic examination.
G. The CD4 count correlates well with immune function and is used to gauge the risk for disease progression, development of opportunistic infections (OIs) and the need for OI prophylaxis. Antiretroviral therapy is recommended for all patients with history of an AIDS-defining illness regardless of CD4 count. Therapy is also recommended for asymptomatic patients with CD4 count <200 cells/mm³. Asymptomatic patients with CD4 counts of 201-350 cells/mm³ should be offered treatment. For asymptomatic patients with CD4 counts >350 cells/mm³ and HIV RNA >100,000 copies/ml, most experienced clinicians defer therapy but some clinicians may consider initiating treatment. Therapy should be deferred for patients with CD4 counts >350 cells/mm³ and plasma HIV RNA <100,000 copies/ml. Patients who are symptom free and have a CD4 count >350 cells/mm³ and viral load <100,000 copies/ml should be monitored every 3 months for disease progression.
H. Plasma HIV-1 RNA quantification is a factor in determining when to initiate treatment and is critical when assessing response to therapy. The minimal change in viral load considered to be statistically significant is a threefold, or a 0.5 log10 copies/ml, change. The goal of antiretroviral therapy is a viral load below the level of detection (<50 copies/ml using the Amplicor assay). Prior to the initiation of therapy viral load should be measured. Viral load measurement should be repeated at 2–8 weeks following treatment initiation to assess response. There should be a decrease of at least 1.0 log10 copies/ml. Viral load reduction to below the limits of assay detection in a treatment-naive patient should occur within the first 4-6 months of therapy. Once a patient is on standard antiretroviral treatment, viral load testing should be repeated every 3-4 months.
I. Despite the improving efficacy of antiretroviral therapy, appropriate prophylaxis against opportunistic infection remains a clinical imperative in the care of persons with HIV infection. Prophylaxis against mycobacterium tuberculosis, Pneumocystis pneumonia, Toxoplasma gondii, Mycobacterium avium complex, and varicella virus are recommended as standard of care.