The most common cause of ascites is cirrhosis, which accounts for approximately 80% of cases. Patients with ascites should be extensively questioned regarding risk factors for liver disease. Cancer is the cause in about 10% of cases. Other causes include heart failure, tuberculosis, dialysis, and pancreatic diseases. Rare causes include surgery or trauma to the lymphatics, chlamydia peritonitis, nephrotic syndrome, systemic lupus erythematosus, myxedema, and AIDS-related infections.
The accuracy of physical findings is variable, depending on the amount of fluid present, technique, and clinical setting (may be difficult in patients who are obese). The absence of flank dullness is the most accurate predictor against the presence of ascites. Approximately 1500 ml of fluid has to be present for flank dullness to be detected. When flank dullness is detected, it is useful to see if it shifts with rotation of the patient (i.e., shifting dullness). Ultrasound is helpful when physical examination is not definite.
A. All patients with new-onset ascites should undergo abdominal paracentesis. Abdominal paracentesis is the most rapid and cost-effective method of diagnosing the cause of ascites and determining whether fluid is infected. All patients with decompensated liver disease with ascites should undergo paracentesis to rule out spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. In addition, all patients with fever, abdominal pain or tenderness, mental status changes, ileus, or hypotension should undergo paracentesis to rule out infection. Peripheral leukocytosis, acidosis, and worsening renal function are other indications to perform abdominal paracentesis in patients with ascites.
B. Serum-to-ascites albumin gradient (SAAG) accurately identifies the presence of portal hypertension and is more useful than the protein-based exudate/transudate concept. Calculating the SAAG involves measuring the albumin concentration of serum and ascitic fluid specimens obtained on the same day and subtracting the ascitic fluid value from the serum value. If the SAAG is ≥1.1 g/dl, the patient has portal hypertension or high albumin gradient ascites.
C. Initial tests on ascitic fluid include cell count and differential, total protein, and SAAG. If infection is suspected, fluid should be cultured at the bedside in blood culture bottles. Other tests include glucose, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), Gram stain, and amylase concentration. Cytology, tuberculosis smear and culture, triglyceride, and bilirubin concentration should be performed as indicated.
D. An absolute polymorphonuclear (PMN) count ≥250 cells/mm³ is the most sensitive and rapid way of detecting spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP). Antibiotics should be considered in any patient with a PMN count of 250 cells/mm³. SBP is a preventable cause of death in patients with cirrhosis and ascites. Hence, prompt detection and treatment are very important.
E. Patients with high SAAG ascites (portal hypertension) usually are responsive to salt restriction and diuretics. Fluid loss and weight change are related directly to sodium balance in patients with portal hypertension-related ascites. Dietary sodium is restricted to 2 g/day or 88 mmol/day. Fluid restriction is not necessary in treating patients with cirrhosis and ascites unless the serum sodium is <120 mmol/L. The usual diuretic regimen for cirrhotic ascites consists of spironolactone 100 mg and furosemide 40 mg. If this dose is ineffective in increasing urinary sodium or decreasing body weight, the doses of both medications should be increased simultaneously as needed at a 100:40 ratio (e.g., spironolactone 200 mg plus furosemide 80 mg, then 300 mg plus 120 mg, and finally 400 mg plus 160 mg). A single large-volume paracentesis followed by diet and diuretic therapy is appropriate for patients with tense ascites. Patients who are diuretic sensitive preferably should be treated with sodium restriction and oral diuretics rather than with serial paracentesis. Liver transplantation should be considered in patients with cirrhosis and ascites. Serial therapeutic paracentesis or transjugular intrahepatic portasystemic stent (TIPS) may be performed in patients with refractory ascites.
F. Peritoneal carcinomatosis is the most common cause of low albumin-gradient ascites (SAAG <1.1 g/dl). Ascites caused by tuberculous peritonitis are treated by antituberculous therapy. Pancreatic ascites may resolve spontaneously, require endoscopic stent placement in the pancreatic duct or operative intervention, or respond to treatment with somatostatin. Chlamydia peritonitis is treated with tetracycline. Ascites caused by lupus serositis may respond to glucocorticoids. Dialysis-related ascites may respond to aggressive dialysis.

