A. If there is clinical suspicion for meningitis, a lumbar puncture (LP) should be performed (prior imaging may be indicated). At a minimum, glucose, protein, cell count, Gram stain, and bacterial cultures should be obtained from the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). The history and physical examination will dictate what other tests, if any, should be sent (see later). It is prudent to obtain an extra tube of CSF in case further studies become necessary.
B. Aseptic meningitis describes a syndrome of clinical and laboratory findings consistent with meningeal inflammation with negative Gram stain and routine bacterial cultures from the CSF. Glucose, protein, and cell counts can be highly variable and should not be relied on to distinguish between septic and aseptic meningitis; the threshold for initiation of empiric dexamethasone and antibiotics should be low. Parameningeal bacterial infections (e.g., mastoiditis, epidural abscess) and partially treated bacterial meningitis can have a similar clinical presentation with negative CSF cultures, so these should be excluded.
C. For all patients, risk factors for HIV, herpes simplex virus (HSV), and syphilis should be ascertained. A positive CSF-VDRL is highly specific but insensitive for neurosyphilis; antibody tests specific for Treponema pallidum may prove to be more sensitive. Neurosyphilis is classically treated with IV penicillin.
D. HIV itself can cause meningitis, particularly during the seroconversion syndrome of acute HIV and in late-stage disease. It is also a risk factor for opportunistic infections of the CNS, such as Cryptococcus (see Central Nervous System Infection in the Patient with HIV). In patients with risk factors for HIV, aseptic meningitis should trigger testing for acute HIV by serum enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and serum polymerase chain reaction (PCR). CSF PCR for HIV is also available.
E. HSV is a very common cause of aseptic meningitis. It is usually caused by HSV-2. During the primary episode, most patients will also have active or very recent genital lesions. The diagnosis can be confirmed by PCR on CSF.
F. A travel history may reveal risk factors for tuberculosis, coccidiomycosis, and parasites: all possible causes of aseptic meningitis. Special culture media are required to isolate mycobacteria and fungi from the CSF. Elicit any history of exposure to ticks—which may carry Lyme disease, ehrlichiosis, or Rocky Mountain spotted fever and to mosquitoes-vectors for viruses such as West Nile, St. Louis, Eastern Equine, and Western and California encephalitides. A history of possible exposure to rodents or their excreta can raise the index of suspicion for lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus and leptospirosis. If one of these is suspected, specific serology and in some cases CSF PCR testing can be obtained. Enteroviruses (coxsackie A and B and echoviruses) are the most commonly identified cause of aseptic meningitis. The CSF, nasopharynx, and stool can be cultured for enterovirus. CSF PCR for enterovirus is also available. Other viruses known to cause meningitis include influenza; parainfluenza type 3; mumps; measles; varicella-zoster (primary infection or secondary outbreak); Epstein-Barr; cytomegalovirus; adenoviruses; and human herpes virus types 6, 7, and 8. Serology and in some cases CSF PCR may be useful in making these diagnoses. Aseptic meningitis has been less frequently associated with a large number of other infectious agents, including Mycoplasma spp., Legionella spp., Whipple's disease, and Bartonella henselae (cat scratch disease).
G. Noninfectious causes of meningitis, such as subarachnoid hemorrhage, carcinomatous meningitis, and rheumatologic causes (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus, Behçet's disease, vasculitis, and sarcoidosis), should be considered in the appropriate settings. Meningeal inflammation has been reported with the use of NSAIDs, some antibiotics, IV immune globulin, and some cancer therapies.

