A. Asthma is a chronic inflammatory lung disease characterized by episodes of increased airway inflammation resulting in airflow obstruction and dyspnea. The physician should consider a diagnosis of asthma in patients who have dyspnea on exertion, cough, or wheezing.  As with any patient, the first step in evaluation is a thorough history, in this case with particular focus on conditions that trigger symptoms. Some examples of classic triggers of asthma include exercise, cold air, upper respiratory tract infections, animal dander, pollen, mold, and tobacco smoke. Because asthma is often associated with atopy, the physician should inquire about a personal history of eczema and seasonal allergies. Additionally, a family history of asthma or other atopic disease would support a diagnosis of asthma.
B. The physical examination in patients with asthma is often completely normal. That being said, one should listen for wheezing on lung examination and upper airway sounds (stridor) because this large airway obstruction can sometimes mimic asthma. In addition, the nares should be inspected for nasal polyps that can be found as part of a triad of asthma, nasal polyps, and aspirin sensitivity. The posterior oro-pharynx should be examined for “cobblestoning” associated with postnasal drip, a common exacerbating condition in asthma.
C. Although there is no single diagnostic test for asthma, spirometry with bronchodilator responsiveness is a common next step in the evaluation. Most patients with asthma will have normal pulmonary function when not having an exacerbation, so this finding does not exclude the diagnosis. If the patient is symptomatic, the spirometry should show an obstructive pattern with forced expiratory volume (FEV1)/forced vital capacity (FVC) <70%. If either FEV1 or FVC improves with the use of a bronchodilator, this would support the diagnosis of asthma because part of the definition of the disease is reversibility of airflow obstruction. The American Thoracic Society (ATS) criteria for “responsiveness” require an increase of 200 ml and 12% in either FEV₁ or FVC.
D. As already stated, a key aspect of asthma is variability in airflow obstruction. An alternative way to demonstrate this is with ambulatory peak flow monitoring. Peak flow meters are reasonably inexpensive and portable; however, the data are limited by the fact that the results are effort dependent. After being instructed in appropriate technique, patients should obtain peak flows at different times of day, when asymptomatic and when dyspneic or wheezy. Variability in peak flows >20% is consistent with asthma. Although useful diagnostically, the peak flow meter is generally more useful as a way to monitor for control of established disease.
E. If neither of these studies is revealing, it is reasonable to consider bronchoprovocation testing, traditionally done with methacholine. Patients are given progressively higher concentrations of inhaled methacholine, a muscarinic agonist that causes smooth muscle contraction, with repeated spirometry. The test is positive if there is a fall in FEV1 of 20% from baseline. This test has a high negative predictive value, so it is most helpful as a way to rule out asthma. If a patient is unresponsive to methacholine, alternative diagnoses should be sought for the patient's dyspnea, cough, or wheeze.
F. Asthma is treated with a combination of quick relief and controller medications. The typical quick relief medication is a beta agonist inhaler, such as albuterol. Ideally, a patient's asthma is well enough controlled that there is only rare use of the reliever medication. If albuterol is required more than a few times a week, a controller medication should be initiated. For most patients, this means a steroid inhaler, although some patients respond well to leukotriene modifiers as first-line therapy. If symptoms are still not well controlled, higher-dose steroid inhalers or the addition of a long-acting beta agonist can be considered. If further escalation of therapy is required, it is appropriate to look for other causes of dyspnea and wheeze and refer the patient to a pulmonologist.
G. In addition to pharmacologic interventions, patients should be counseled to avoid triggers by minimizing allergen exposure and maintaining a clean living environment. If a patient with asthma is currently smoking, smoking cessation is essential. Clinicians should also create an "action plan" with patients based on peak flow measurements with thresholds for increasing therapy and seeking medical attention.

