A. Belching, burping, and eructation have roughly the same meaning and refer to the passage of gas from the stomach or esophagus through the mouth. In some patients, belching is the only symptom. In others, belching may be accompanied by abdominal discomfort, chest pain, or the passage of excess flatus. All people swallow air in variable amounts, and all people belch from time to time.
B. Most patients who complain of belching swallow excess amounts of air. In fact, they may unwittingly take air into the esophagus before each belch that then is eructated. This practice may be associated with psychological stress or is thought by some patients to relieve other abdominal symptoms. Some patients may improve simply by being made aware of the cause of belching and given reassurance that they are otherwise well. Avoidance of gum chewing and carbonated beverages also is helpful.
C. Occasionally, belching is a sign of organic disease. If the gastric outlet is obstructed partially by peptic disease or carcinoma, swallowed air cannot pass into the bowel and eructation may develop, sometimes accompanied by abdominal pain and vomiting. For unexplained reasons, patients who have symptomatic gallstones may complain of belching. Finally, belching of feculent-smelling gas may indicate prolonged gastric stasis or a gastrocolic fistula that has developed from a carcinoma of the stomach or transverse colon.
D. Upper GI x-ray series or upper GI endoscopy is used to evaluate the stomach for partial gastric outlet obstruction and in rare cases may indicate a gastrocolic fistula complicating a gastric carcinoma. In general, because gastric outlet obstruction or a carcinoma that is large enough to erode into the colon is likely to be diagnosed by an upper GI x-ray series, that study is the appropriate first step in the diagnostic evaluation of belching. However, in some patients with peptic disease who have a small ulcer or have erosions and gastritis, the upper GI x-ray series may be nondiagnostic. In these patients, an upper GI endoscopy may be necessary to confirm the diagnosis.
E. The diagnosis of gallstones and gallbladder disease usually is made by ultrasonography of the upper abdomen.
F. Perform a barium enema if the patient belches foul-smelling gas and if the question of a gastrocolic fistula remains after a nondiagnostic upper GI x-ray series or endoscopy.
G. Testing gut motor function may help diagnose a motility disorder, neuropathy, or systemic disease, such as scleroderma.