Biliary colic is abdominal pain caused by sudden obstruction of the cystic or common bile duct (CBD). Pain is usually perceived in the right upper quadrant (RUQ) or epigastrium, lasts 15 minutes to several hours, is associated with vomiting, typically comes on suddenly, and may be severe. Gallstone disease is the most common cause; however, biliary parasites, infectious agents, blood clots, and occasionally tumors may cause symptoms. The pain may be confused with peptic ulcer disease, bowel obstruction, pancreatitis, urinary calculi, diverticulitis, some metabolic disorders, or functional bowel disease. A careful history is critical when evaluating upper abdominal pain because asymptomatic gallbladder disease and biliary tract dilation (following cholecystectomy) are very common and a failure of detection may lead to potentially harmful and ineffective interventions, including biliary endoscopy and surgery.
A. The initial history should focus on the location, duration, and character of the symptoms as described earlier. There is commonly a history of similar, although often less severe, symptoms in the past. Although the association with fatty meals is touted as a classic symptom, this is nonspecific and may not be present. Murphy's sign (involuntary cessation of respiration with palpation of the RUQ) may be seen with cholecystitis but is nonspecific and relatively insensitive in the assessment of biliary colic. Epigastric and RUQ tenderness during an attack is common but again not particularly useful in determining the precise source of the problem. The WBC count may be normal or slightly elevated when cholangitis is present but similarly non-diagnostic. Total bilirubin and aminotransferase levels are mildly elevated in many patients but may be normal in up to 60%. The combination of elevated liver enzymes and pancreatic enzymes should suggest distal biliary/proximal pancreatic duct obstruction (usually from gallstones) until proved otherwise.
B. Abdominal ultrasonography detects gallstones when present in the gallbladder with an approximately 95% sensitivity. It is less valuable in detecting stones in the CBD (15%-25% sensitivity), although a dilated CBD in the presence of a gallbladder (i.e., no prior cholecystectomy) is seen in about 75% of those with cholecholithiasis. Other causes of pain, such as pancreatitis and nephrolithiasis, may also be detected during ultrasonography.
C. Although infrequently used now, oral cholecystography may provide useful information regarding gallbladder function and the presence of stones when ultrasound studies are normal. More commonly, biliary scintigraphy using radiotracers that are excreted into the bile are used when there is a high level of suspicion for continued cystic duct obstruction and ultrasonography is nondiagnostic. There are also some data to support its use to evaluate sphincter of Oddi function; however, this remain controversial. The use of nuclear medicine studies is this setting varies widely and depends on the availability of biliary manometry (see section E) and should be individualized based on the clinical scenario.
D. The absence of gallstones in the proper clinical setting (atypical symptoms and/or normal liver tests and pancreatic enzymes) should prompt the evaluation for nonbiliary cause such as peptic ulcer or functional bowel disease. Upper endoscopy (esophagogastroduodenoscopy [EGD]) is a safe and reliable study to exclude peptic ulcer disease and gastroduodenal tumors, and a side-viewing endoscope should be used when tumors of the major ampulla are suspected. When liver tests are abnormal in this setting, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP), endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS), and possibly biliary manometry should be considered to assess for sphincter of Oddi dysfunction, small CBD stones or “sludge," or small tumors or intraductal polypoid lesions that could cause biliary colic.
E. A history compatible with biliary colic, along with elevated liver tests and no detectable gallbladder pathology, suggests possible CBD obstruction from stones, sludge (microlithiasis), parasites, or biliary dyskinesia. ERCP is usually performed in these patients to diagnose and treat the source of obstruction. EUS can be performed immediately prior to planned ERCP to increase the therapeutic yield and reduce the number of “diagnostic” ERCPs. In experienced hands EUS is accurate in detecting or excluding CBD stones in >95% of cases. Where available, biliary manometry can accurately diagnose sphincter of Oddi dysfunction and direct the performance of sphincterotomy, when indicated.
F. When gallstones are detected on ultrasound within the gallbladder and liver tests are significantly elevated, choledocholithiasis should be considered. If liver tests are falling and there are no signs of cholangitis, cholecystectomy with intraoperative cholangiography (IOC) is generally recommended. If CBD stones are found on IOC, then CBD exploration can be performed or cholecystectomy can be completed, followed by ERCP.

