Breast cancer is the most common malignancy and the second leading cause of cancer-related death among U.S. women. The most effective means for diagnosing early breast cancer is screening mammography in combination with physical examination. Nonpalpable breast lesions (detectable only by mammography) may represent small, early, and potentially curable cancers. Because mammography cannot provide a specific diagnosis for breast lesions, biopsies are often required to determine whether a mass is benign or malignant. More than 1 million breast biopsies are performed in the United States annually; 11%-36% of biopsies performed for mammographically identified nonpalpable abnormalities are positive. The use of percutaneous fine needle aspiration (FNA) or core needle biopsy (CNB) for palpable breast masses, or stereotactic- or sonography-guided CNB for nonpalpable masses, may reduce the expense and morbidity associated with the diagnostic workup of breast lesions and decrease the number of open breast biopsies for benign lesions (see also Gynecomastia, p 162).
A. Needle aspiration of breast masses that feel benign should be a routine part of the evaluation of breast masses. It is safe, is cost-effective, and immediately helps distinguish cystic from solid masses. It can be performed with an 18- to 22-gauge needle with local anesthesia. Nonbloody fluid can be discarded without being sent to the laboratory for pathologic study. A persistent mass or bloody fluid mandates excisional biopsy to rule out malignancy.
B. Diagnostic mammography is indicated (1) for breast signs or symptoms (pain, mass, discharge, thickening, skin or nipple retraction, nipple eczema), (2) before breast surgery (biopsy, augmentation, reduction), (3) as routine follow-up of a patient with previous breast cancer (all remaining breast tissue), and (4) for metastatic cancer of unknown primary site. Preoperative mammography is performed (1) to characterize a lesion as obviously benign (lipoma, oil cyst, calcified fibroadenoma) or malignant (to plan the surgical approach), (2) to determine the size and extent of the lesion for adequate excision and treatment selection (especially important in a patient for whom conservative surgery and irradiation are being considered because multicentric disease in the affected breast is a contraindication to this procedure), (3) to detect additional lesions in the ipsilateral or contralateral breast, and (4) to obtain a baseline for comparison with follow-up mammography. It is important to recognize that mammograms may be negative even when breast cancer is obviously present. Thus a negative mammogram does not replace the need for biopsy of a palpable mass.
C. For palpable breast masses, percutaneous FNA or CNB can be performed with local anesthesia. To evaluate nonpalpable masses, CNB can be guided with stereotactic mammography or sonographic images. The accuracy of these procedures is >90%. If needle biopsy shows a breast mass to be benign, conservative follow-up with physical examination and mammography can be instituted, obviating the need for further surgical intervention. If a needle biopsy is positive, surgical excision can be planned to cure or stage the patient with a single surgical procedure.
D. Many authors have suggested that because of the possibility of a false-negative FNA, all palpable masses should undergo excisional biopsy. In one study using physical examination, mammography, and FNA followed by excisional biopsy for confirmation of pathology, patients who had negative or benign findings on all three clinical tests (physical examination, mammography, and FNA) also had benign surgical pathologic conditions. This has led to the recommendation for clinical and mammographic observation rather than surgical excision when these criteria are fulfilled.
E. When breast malignancy is confirmed histologically, a routine outpatient workup to exclude distant metastasis is indicated. Complete physical examination, CBC, liver function tests (LFTs), and chest x-ray (CXR) are routinely performed. A preoperative bone scan is indicated only if the patient has symptoms that are suspicious for bony metastasis. CT of the liver is indicated only if the LFT results are abnormal. The AJC-UICC staging system for breast cancer has been modified recently. Clinical staging includes careful inspection and palpation of the skin, breast, and lymph nodes (axillary, supraclavicular, and cervical) and pathologic examination of the breast or other tissues to establish the diagnosis of breast carcinoma. Pathologic staging includes data used for clinical staging, surgical resection, and a pathologic examination of the primary carcinoma. Pathologic staging can now be performed if the primary tumor is removed with no growth tumor in the margins and, in addition, if at least the lowest level (1) of axillary lymph nodes is resected, rather than all three levels.

