Dyspnea, the subjective sensation of breathlessness, is a common problem in patients with underlying cardiac disease. Because dyspnea has numerous cardiovascular and noncardiovascular causes, establishing a definitive diagnosis can be difficult. A thorough initial evaluation with emphasis on the history, examination, and several key tests is essential.
Although the pathophysiology responsible for dyspnea is complex and incompletely understood, most cardiac causes are attributable to elevations in intracardiac pressures, pulmonary vascular stretch, and activation of perivascular nerve fibers.
A. The history and physical examination should first be aimed at excluding noncardiac causes of dyspnea (pulmonary, musculoskeletal, and neurologic) and then on establishing the primary location of underlying cardiac dysfunction (right ventricular [RV] vs. left ventricular [LV]).
B. Cardiac causes of dyspnea can be conveniently dichotomized into processes with primary RV dysfunction and those with primary LV dysfuntion.
C. Physical examination findings suggestive of RV dysfunction include elevated jugular venous pressure (JVP), ascites, and lower extremity swelling. In contrast, LV dysfunction with resultant rise in pulmonary venous pressure is suggested by the presence of pulmonary rales.
D. RV failure can be divided on the basis of pathophysiology into three distinct categories. These include primary myocardial RV dysfunction, impairment of RV filling due to pericardial disease, and inadequate RV output due to increases in RV afterload.
E. The findings of an RV heave and right-sided extra heart sounds (S3 or S4) suggest intrinsic RV muscular dysfunction. Important causes include acute and chronic ischemia, restrictive cardiomyopathy, and pressure/volume overload due to intracardiac shunts from congenital and acquired causes.
F. Pericardial diseases resulting in clinical RV failure include pericardial tamponade and constrictive pericardial disease. Pericarditis, inflammation of the pericardium presenting with chest pain exacerbated by lying supine, pericardial friction rub, and diffuse ST-segment elevation on the ECG, can precipitate pericardial tamponade and set the stage for future constrictive disease.
The presence of distant heart sounds, elevated neck veins, and systemic hypotension suggests the presence of a pericardial effusion with the resultant syndrome of tamponade. A history of pericardial injury with examination findings of RV failure and a pericardial knock suggest constrictive disease.
G. The findings of RV dysfunction associated with an increased P2 component of the S2 and a pulmonary artery (PA) tap suggest pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). Rare cases of pulmonary hypertension are attributable to primary disease (PPH), whereas most PAH is the result of an identifiable concomitant disease. Common causes of secondary PAH include thromboembolic disease, connective tissue diseases, HIV infection, and medication side effects.
H. Dyspnea attributable to primary LV dysfunction is caused by elevations in pulmonary venous pressures with resultant vascular stretch and extravascular fluid shifts impairing gas exchange. These processes are reflected by the physical examination finding of rales. Impairment of contraction, relaxation, and left cardiac valves can underlie this process.
I. A diffuse and laterally displaced left ventricle with an S3 suggests decreased LV ejection fraction (LVEF) and dilation of the LV chamber. Dilated cardiomyopathy most often results from coronary artery disease, but other insults including toxin exposure, infection, endocrine disorders, long-standing arrhythmia, and chronic hypertension must be considered.
J. A normally located and focal point of maximal impulse (PMI) suggests preserved LVEF. Dyspnea from LV dysfunction with preserved LV function can result from intrinsic abnormalities in relaxation (acute ischemia, LV hypertrophy, and restrictive processes) and from processes that increase LV afterload (hypertensive urgency and aortic coarctation).
K. The presence of a murmur is often indicative of valvular pathology. In the dyspneic patient, the finding of a murmur may be explanatory and should be clarified with confirmatory examination maneuvers and echocardiography.

