Caustics, a category of chemicals, have the potential to cause tissue injury or burn on contact, with the most commonly ingested caustic agent being an alkali. Most caustic ingestions occur in children and are unintentional. When they do occur in adults, they are typically the result of a suicide attempt, psychiatric illness, or intoxication. Storage of caustic agents in atypical containers such as soda cans or water bottles is the cause of many ingestions. Although the severe mouth pain caused by ingesting caustics often limits ingestions to small quantities, one mouthful can be enough to cause serious injury or even death.
The most significant and acute emergency is the development of laryngeal edema, which may necessitate tracheal intubation for airway protection, and esophageal or gastric perforation, which can rapidly progress to systemic shock. Caustic exposure to skin most typically results in a burn and is commonly referred to as a chemical burn. Most chemical burns are the result of direct damage to the skin from a chemical reaction, although some may cause a burn secondary to an exothermic chemical reaction often precipitated by exposure to water.
A. An important component of the initial evaluation, after airway, breathing, and circulation, is to note the time of ingestion in relation to the last meal and the type, form, and concentration of substance ingested if possible. Alkali are commonly found in lye, drain cleaners, oven cleaners, Clinitest tablets, and button batteries; acids are found in swimming pool cleaners, rust removers, and battery acid.
Almost half of patients with caustic ingestion will report ingesting only a very small amount of chemical, yet up to 20% of these patients will have esophageal injury on endoscopy. Larger ingestions may present with signs and symptoms of airway and respiratory compromise and esophageal perforation and may present with the relatively late findings of mediastinitis: respiratory distress, subcutaneous emphysema, and shock.
B. Alkali burns cause liquefaction necrosis in the esophagus, involving the mucosa, submucosa, and longitudinal muscle. The stomach is affected in 20% of cases.
C. Alkali burns to the cornea are an ophthalmologic emergency and require continuous irrigation for at least 3 hours, instillation of antibiotics, and emergent ophthalmologic consultation.
D. If the patient has ingested a battery, or if there is any suspicion that a battery has been ingested, the entire GI tract should be evaluated with radiographs. Symptoms of battery ingestion include vomiting, refusal to eat, increased salivation, and pain on swallowing. Emetics are contraindicated.
E. Cathartics may be administered to facilitate evacuation; emesis should not be attempted. Endoscopic removal is indicated if the battery does not pass in 36–48 hours or if the patient develops symptoms.
F. Acids cause coagulation necrosis with eschar formation and mainly affect the stomach, leading to pylorospasm and eventual full-thickness necrosis and perforation.
G. Patients who have ingested an alkali or battery and have a reliable history, no symptoms, and a normal physical examination can be monitored in the emergency department or observation unit and discharged after 3–4 hours as long as they remain asymptomatic. Acid ingestion poses a higher risk of perforation, and all such patients should be admitted.
H. First-degree burns cause hyperemia with superficial mucosal desquamation; second-degree burns cause blistering and shallow ulcers; third-degree burns suggest total loss of esophageal epithelium.
I. Treatment of esophageal burns with steroids is not universally agreed to result in better outcomes, but many centers advocate using steroids in second-degree esophageal burns. It generally is accepted that patients with first-degree burns rarely develop esophageal strictures; patients with third-degree burns develop strictures regardless of steroid treatment. Steroids may delay stricture development in those with second-degree burns and should be used with an antibiotic to offset the increase in infection rate caused by steroid use. The dose of methylprednisone is 2 mg/kg/day; 1 g ampicillin every 6 hours or 100 mg/kg every 24 hours in children may be used.
J. Hydrofluoric (HF) acid deserves special mention. It is an agent that rarely can be found in household substances but is commonly used in industry. Minimal exposures can cause very significant morbidity and mortality because it dissociates in tissue and affects metabolism by liquefaction necrosis, bone destruction, and production of insoluble salts. Inhalation exposures to concentrated HF for 5 minutes usually are fatal.
K. Initial management for HF burns after decontamination is directed at deactivating the fluoride ion. For severe burns, inject intradermally 10% calcium gluconate into, and for a distance of 0.5 cm around, the burn. For mild to moderate burns, apply calcium gluconate gel locally. For more diffuse burns, arterial injection of calcium gluconate may be indicated.
L. For unknown amounts of HF acid ingestion, administer 300 ml magnesium citrate. If the concentration of HF acid is known, administer oral magnesium on a milliequivalent-for-milliequivalent basis.
M. Monitor the QT interval for signs of hypocalcemia and make frequent evaluations of acid-base status, electrolytes, and calcium.

