A CNS infection may be the initial presentation for patients who are not aware of their HIV status or for individuals with HIV who are not receiving medical care. Initial evaluation should include review of CD4 count and any history of opportunistic infection. If focal findings are present, or if the patient has clinical evidence of increased intracranial pressure such as lethargy, imaging should be performed as soon as possible. Focal lesions may represent surgical emergencies. Prompt initiation of corticosteroids should be considered if there is evidence of significant elevation in intracranial pressure. If no mass effect is detected on imaging, a lumbar puncture (LP) should be performed.

If a lesion with mass effect is present, toxoplasmosis or primary CNS lymphoma is at the top of the differential. In those with appropriate risk factors, tuberculosis (TB) should be considered. Gliomas and metastatic malignancy are two noninfectious possibilities. Patients with CNS toxoplasmosis generally have a positive serum Toxoplasma antibody and a CD4 count <100 cells/ml. The lesions are often multiple and ring-enhancing. MRI is more sensitive than CT scan for small lesions. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination can be consistent with aseptic meningitis, and Giemsa stain of centrifuged CSF samples can occasionally demonstrate organisms. CSF polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for Toxoplasma gondii may also be helpful in making the diagnosis.

In patients who are clinically stable, have radiographic findings consistent with CNS toxoplasmosis, have a positive Toxoplasma serology, and have not been receiving appropriate Toxoplasma prophylaxis (e.g., trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole or atovaquone), it is reasonable to initiate empiric treatment for toxoplasmosis with pyrimethamine and either sulfadiazine (preferred) or clindamycin. Marked improvement or resolution should be seen on follow-up imaging within 10–14 days. If no such improvement is evident, an alternative diagnosis should be sought and brain biopsy may become necessary. Primary CNS lymphoma can present with solitary or multiple lesions that may or may not enhance. Most patients will have a subacute course and a CD4 count <50 cells/ml. A CSF sample should be sent for cytology and may yield a diagnosis; although these lymphomas are associated with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), EBV PCR from CSF has had variable sensitivity and specificity and should not be relied on diagnostically.

Possible causes of lesions seen on CT or MRI without mass effect include progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML), HIV encephalopathy, and cytomegalovirus (CMV) encephalitis. PML is caused by reactivation of JC virus in severe immunosuppression; patients usually have CD4 count <200 cells/ml. It presents with progressive neurologic deficits and multifocal areas of demyelination. MRI is more sensitive than CT scan for lesions. It can be diagnosed by CSF PCR for JCV. CMV encephalitis occurs in the setting of viral reactivation when a patient's CD4 count is <50 cells/ml (sometimes higher). Imaging is highly variable. CMV can present with encephalitis, myelitis, polyradiculitis—manifesting as lower extremity weakness, decreased reflexes, and urinary retention—or as neuropathy that may affect peripheral nerves, including the cranial nerves. CSF examination can be consistent with aseptic meningitis. Diagnosis is made by detecting CMV DNA or CMV antigens in the CSF or by peripheral nerve biopsy. Primary HIV infection itself can cause a self-limited meningoencephalitis, sometimes accompanied by fever, headache, vomiting, and cranial nerve palsies. HIV encephalopathy occurs in later stages of infection, generally with a CD4 count <200 cells/ml. Patients can present with some combination of cognitive, behavioral, and motor problems. On MRI, the lesions of HIV encephalopathy are usually more symmetric and are less well demarcated than those seen in PML. Elevated protein and a pleocytosis are found in the CSF. The CSF HIV-1 viral load is usually elevated (>1000 copies/ml). Because the signs and symptoms overlap with so many other potential etiologies, HIV encephalopathy should be a diagnosis of exclusion.

If the previously listed investigations remain unrevealing, then consider other infections. There has been a recent increase in the incidence of syphilis among those also at risk of HIV infection, and neurosyphilis has myriad clinical presentations. In patients with HIV, a CD4 count of ≤350 cells/ml and a serum rapid plasma reagin (RPR) titer of ≥1:32 has been shown to correlate with significantly increased odds of neurosyphilis. Rarely, neurosyphilis may present with a focal lesion (gumma). CSF examination can be consistent with aseptic meningitis. CSF VDRL has a high specificity but low sensitivity; antibody tests specific for Treponema pallidum may prove to be more sensitive. Cryptococcal infection of the CNS can present with meningitis and rarely with a local lesion. Patients can present with fever and headache while lacking other signs of meningeal irritation. The CSF is generally found to have low glucose, high protein, and a pleocytosis. Cryptococcal antigen can be detected by agglutination from the CSF, and diagnosis can be confirmed by detection of the organism by India ink stain and culture. Mass lesions may also represent brain abscesses from a variety of organisms, including Staphylococcus, Nocardia, and Rhodococcus, among many others. Cysticercosis should be considered in patients from Central and South America, Asia, and sub-Saharan Africa, particularly if they spent a significant amount of time in rural areas, had contact with pigs, or consumed undercooked pork products. Patients with HIV also remain at risk for bacterial and aseptic meningitis seen in immunocompetent individuals (see Acute and Subacute Meningitis and also Chronic Meningitis).