Chronic behavior change is a useful descriptor that encompasses dementia, aphasia and other focal cognitive disorders, chronic encephalopathy, and psychiatric disorders. Dementia is a clinical syndrome defined as sustained or progressive decline in cognition or behavior that interferes with routine daily activities. Any domains of mental function may be affected, including memory, language, visuospatial skills, attention, executive function, judgment, and social or emotional behavior. The persistence of the deficit(s) differentiates dementia from acute confusional state or delirium. Although many types of dementia are progressive, some (e.g., posttraumatic) are relatively static. Aphasia and other focal cognitive disorders are often chronic but are not considered dementias because they may not encompass multiple domains of cognition or behavior and may not significantly interfere with routine activities outside the specific impairment. They may result from residual static damage following acute brain insults, such as stroke, abscess, or tumor. Chronic encephalopathy is a loosely defined term that implies an ongoing medical etiology, such as hepatic or renal encephalopathy. Chronic psychiatric disorders, by definition, involve chronic behavior change and are discussed elsewhere. The list of possible causes of these varieties of chronic behavior change is long, so it is useful to pursue an organized approach to evaluation, with the goal of identifying the most specific diagnosis and treatment. It is critical to remember that, although most forms of dementia or chronic behavior change are irreversible, they are all treatable. Treatment may (rarely) reverse or partly reverse the overall level of impairment, may produce modest improvements in specific aspects of cognition, may alleviate behavioral symptoms, or may improve safety.

A. As is the case for acute behavior change, a detailed history is the essential first step in the evaluation of chronic behavior change. The first office visit is often best devoted primarily to the gathering of information from the patient and a knowledgeable informant (spouse, child, friend). A structured approach to history taking is helpful, focusing first on specific symptoms and reviewing all domains of cognition and behavior (memory, language, visuospatial skills, attention, executive function, mood, personality, social behavior) and general neurologic function (vision, motor behavior, gait). It is critical to determine the degree to which a patient's routine activities have been altered by these symptoms (slowing, increased mistakes, the need for supervision, the relinquishment of activities). A comprehensive review of systems can reveal important relevant history regarding possible etiologies or potential contributors (e.g., transient ischemic attacks, symptoms suggestive of endocrine dysfunction, sleep disturbance, or depression). A medical and family history can be useful to identify additional clinical context and risk profiles (e.g., cerebrovascular risk, family history of Alzheimer's disease [AD]). Social history is key to the establishment of a premorbid baseline, against which current symptoms should be compared. Highly educated patients may perform surprisingly well on mental status testing but have significant impairment in complex social or vocational activities.
B. The evaluation should include medical and neurologic examination and mental status examination. The presence of medical (e.g., cardiac arrhythmia or carotid bruit) or neurologic (e.g., visual field loss, focal weakness, upgoing toe) signs may provide important etiologic clues. The mental status examination should include observations of the patient's behavior during the interview, particularly focused on arousal and attention, affect, motivation, insight, comportment, and spontaneous use of language. Waxing and waning attention, depressed affect, apathy, denial of deficits or anosognosia, disinhibition or lack of concern, dysarthria, word-finding pauses, or circumlocutory or emptiness of speech may be important signs helpful in the characterization and localization of cerebral dysfunction. A detailed yet focused cognitive examination can yield additional useful information and may yield surprising deficits in patients with relatively preserved social skills. If the mental status examination provides information consistent with the history, the clinician may be satisfied with the characterization of symptoms and signs and wish to pursue an etiologic workup. If questions remain regarding the presence, absence, or nature of cognitive dysfunction, referral for neuropsychologic testing is often helpful. Patients' and family members' reports of cognitive-behavioral symptoms should be taken seriously, and if the constraints of office practice do not allow for the detailed testing of cognitive function, additional resources should be brought to bear, including the expertise of colleagues in behavioral neurology, neuropsychiatry, and neuropsychology.