Hodgkin's lymphoma (HL) typically presents with progressive, nontender, rubbery lymphadenopathy in supraclavicular, cervical, axillary, or (rarely) inguinal regions. Most commonly, patients are 15-35 years of age. Mediastinal adenopathy may be detected incidentally or may lead to symptoms of nonproductive cough, shortness of breath, or both.
A. The diagnosis usually is made on excisional lymph node biopsy; extranodal sites may be confirmatory. The pathology should be reviewed by an expert hematopathologist to rule out benign causes or non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.
B. The following baseline studies are performed in all patients to assess clinical stage: (1) CBC, including lymphocyte count; (2) ESR and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH); (3) liver enzymes, including albumin; (4) serum alkaline phosphatase; (5) renal function tests; (6) chest radiograph (Fig. 1); (7) CT scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis; and (8) bone marrow biopsy. Bone marrow biopsy may be omitted in stage IA/IIA patients without cytopenias. Positron emission tomography (PET) scanning is now routinely used in HL staging and is becoming a component in treatment assessment. Anthracycline-containing therapy requires a baseline assessment of cardiac function, and bleomycin-containing therapy requires a baseline pulmonary function test.
C. Cotswolds modification of Ann Arbor staging system is used.
D. The risk factors for limited stage (I and II) HL are: (1) bulky disease ("X") defined as any mass >10 cm in transverse dimension or mediastinal mass of more than one third of intrathoracic diameter or >35% of thoracic diameter at T5-6; (2) B symptoms (defined as fever higher than 38° С, drenching night sweats, or unexplained weight loss of >10% over 6 months); (3) ESR ≥50 without B symptoms or ≥30 with B symptoms; and (4) more than three involved lymph node sites. Some groups also consider age ≥50 years and extranodal extension as risk factors.
E. Patients without risk factors can be considered for two to four cycles of ABVD (doxorubicin, bleomycin, vinblastine, and dacarbazine) followed by 20-30 Gy of involved field radiation therapy (IFRT). Patients with any risk factors may receive four cycles of ABVD followed by 30–36 Gy of IFRT. Another option in selected patients with limited-stage HL is ABVD alone for four to six cycles.
F. The risk factors for advanced stage HL (IIXB, III, and IV) are enumerated in the International Prognostic Score (IPS) and include the following: (1) albumin <4 g/dl, (2) hemoglobin <10.5 g/dl, (3) male gender, (4) stage IV disease, (5) age ≥45 years, (6) WBC count ≥15,000/mm³, and (7) lymphocyte count of <600/mm³ or <8% of WBC.
G. Six cycles of ABVD remains the standard combination chemotherapy for advanced stage HL. Prospective studies comparing ABVD with new regimens, Stanford V and BEACOPP (bleomycin, etoposide, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, prednisone, and procarbazine), are ongoing. In IPS 0–3 and bulky stage II disease, IFRT is administered after satisfactory ABVD response (30-36 Gy). Another option for patients at the IPS 0–3 advanced stage is the 12-week regimen of Stanford V (vinblastine, doxorubicin, vincristine, bleomycin, mechlorethamine, etoposide, and prednisone) followed by IFRT for initial sites >5 cm. Patients ages ≤60 years with IPS of 4–7 may be considered for escalated BEACOPP followed by IFRT to initial sites >5 cm.
Patients with relapsed or refractory HL should be evaluated for salvage chemotherapy followed by autologous stem cell transplantation.

