A. Blood coagulation represents conversion of the soluble plasma protein fibrinogen into an insoluble fibrillar polymer, fibrin. It is the result of complex serial reactions involving procoagulant proteins that circulate in plasma as inert precursors until converted sequentially by specific chain reactions to their active forms. Factors are numbered not by the order in which they become activated but by the order in which they were discovered. The prothrombin time (PT) measures the extrinsic and common pathways of coagulation, including factors VII, X, V, II, and I. The partial thromboplastin time (PTT) measures the intrinsic and common pathways of coagulation, including factors XII, XI, IX, VIII, X, V, II, and I. The thrombin time (TT) measures the time it takes to convert fibrinogen to fibrin, the last stage of the common pathway.
B. When confronted with a prolonged PT or PTT, first take a careful history, including previous bleeding or bruising, spontaneously or after surgery or trauma. A family history of bleeding and a complete list of medications being taken (prescription or not) are essential. Confirm that platelets are normal by count. Also inquire about history of clotting because lupus anticoagulants can prolong PT bleeding time. In 1990 an analysis of 862 publications on the bleeding time concluded that the bleeding time is not a useful test, particularly as a preoperative screening test in a patient with negative bleeding history (see Rodgers reference).
C. Patients with a history of bleeding disorders often know the etiologic factors and corrective measures taken in the past. If so, correct the situation as before (if possible, check with the patient's regular physician for dosage and type of factor correction) or refer the patient to a hematologist.
D. When the cause is unknown or when there is no history of bleeding, first confirm the abnormality of the coagulation times, especially if there has been no previous bleeding with trauma or major surgery. Again, a detailed history, including medications, and a full physical examination are essential.
E. When coagulation tests do not correct with mixing studies, it usually is because an inhibitor or anticoagulant is present. A correction denotes a deficiency of one or more coagulation factors. Inhibitors are either antibodies directed to specific factors (e.g., factor VIII or factor IX antibody) or an antiphospholipid antibody (lupuslike antibody) directed to phospholipid. Inhibition can also occur from a drug such as heparin or protamine, but it is usually known when these substances are present.
F. An isolated prolonged PT that corrects with mixing suggests a factor VII deficiency, and this factor can then be measured directly. If no correction occurs on mixing with normal plasma, there is likely an inhibitor present, most likely a lupuslike inhibitor; however, a specific factor antibody could also be present. Specific assays for a lupuslike inhibitor are available.
G. An isolated prolonged PTT that corrects with mixing suggests one or more factor deficiencies (VIII, IX, XI, or XII). An inherited deficiency is often of a single factor, whereas multiple-factor deficiencies are usually acquired (e.g., liver disease). No correction suggests a lupus or specific inhibitor. Factor VIII deficiency (classic hemophilia A) is an X-linked inherited disorder that affects only males clinically; females are carriers. It is the most common severe coagulation disorder. Coordinate treatment with an experienced hematologist, but emergency replacement can be done with fresh frozen plasma (FFP), cryoprecipitate, or factor VIII concentrates. Von Willebrand's disease is the most common and most heterogeneous of heritable defects of coagulation. It arises from a qualitative or quantitative deficiency of the adhesive glycoprotein, von Willebrand factor (vWF), which is required for platelet adhesion. It serves as a carrier protein for factor VIII and stabilizes factor VIII in the plasma. vWF is an autosomal-dominant disorder with its gene located on chromosome 12. Some of the rare types of vWD are actually autosomal recessive. Last, factor IX deficiency (hemophilia B) is an X-linked disorder that is indistinguishable from factor VIII disease clinically, but it is treated with FFP or with factor IX concentrates.
H. A prolonged TT is often caused by small amounts of heparin that many patients receive in the hospital; therefore, a reptilase time (RT) may be done to exclude heparin. Reptilase is a thrombinlike enzyme from a particular snake venom that is not inhibited by heparin. If both the TT and RT are prolonged, the abnormality is from low fibrinogen or the presence of fibrinogen degradation products (FDPs), a paraprotein, or an abnormal fibrinogen molecule, all of which can be measured directly.
I. When both the PT and PTT are prolonged, the same reasoning can be applied as discussed for each individual test, except that multiple factors in multiple pathways may be deficient (inhibitor mix corrects) or may be inhibited (inhibitor mix does not correct). Again, specific factors can be assayed directly and potential causes can be considered as indicated in the decision tree.

