Cough is one of the most common reasons that patients seek medical attention. Although it is one of the defense mechanisms protecting the respiratory system, it also contributes to the spread of airborne disease and can be bothersome to patients. Cough can result from infection, inflammation, and mechanical or chemical irritation. The majority of cases of cough can be diagnosed and treated by following a stepwise approach.

A. Obtaining a thorough history is the first step in the diagnosis and therapy of cough. Initial evaluation begins with categorizing the cough as acute (<3 weeks), sub-acute (3-8 weeks), or chronic (>8 weeks). This categorization is helpful because the majority of acute cough is infectious in nature, most commonly viral. Chronic cough has a more varied differential diagnosis (see later). Other important features of the history include current and past smoking history and occupational exposures. All patients with cough should be asked about the use of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors because cough is a common side effect of this class of medications. Review should also include potential infectious exposures such as tuberculosis, endemic fungi, and *Bordetella pertussis*.
B. Physical examination should focus on signs of underlying disease that would predispose to cough. These findings include cobblestoning of the posterior oropharynx or sinus tenderness suggesting postnasal drip, wheezing suggestive of asthma, or crackles consistent with interstitial lung disease. Many of the most common causes of cough, however, will have no localizing physical examination findings.
C. Acute cough is commonly caused by viral infections of the upper or lower respiratory tract. New-onset cough can also be a sign of an exacerbation of an underlying disease such as asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), or bronchiectasis or a response to a new allergen or irritant. Most causes of acute cough can be treated with an antihistamine and/or decongestant and do not require further evaluation. Although most acute coughs have a less serious cause, clinicians should remain vigilant to the possibility of life-threatening cough, including diagnoses such as pneumonia, congestive heart failure (CHF), and pulmonary embolism.
D. There are less data to guide the evaluation and management of subacute cough. Subacute cough that is not thought to follow an infection should be treated as chronic cough. Postinfectious cough can be from a variety of etiologies, including postnasal drip, exacerbation of underlying asthma, or bronchitis. Treatment should be guided by most likely cause of persisting cough.
E. The majority of chronic cough is the result of cough-variant asthma, upper airway cough syndrome (UACS), and gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). The most recent American College of Chest Physicians (ACCP) guidelines recommend the use of the term UACS in lieu of postnasal drip because it is more comprehensive. These guidelines also support the addition of nonasthmatic eosinophilic bronchitis (NAEB) as a common cause of chronic cough. NAEB consists of cough with normal spirometry without airway responsiveness and eosinophilic infiltration of the bronchial tree that resolves with steroid inhaler therapy.
F. All patients with chronic cough should have a chest x-ray (CXR) study to assess for mass lesions and infiltrates and other anatomic causes of cough.
G. Most algorithms, including that of the ACCP, recommend a strategy of empiric therapy after history, physical examination, and CXR. Initial therapy usually begins with UACS or asthma, but it can be guided by clinical impression based on history and physical examination. If UACS seems most likely, initiate empiric therapy with antihistamines and decongestants. If there is only a partial response, addition of nasal steroids or nasal anticholinergics should be considered. Further evaluation, including sinus films, is warranted in patients with persistent UACS symptoms after maximal therapy.
H. Patients in whom asthma is suspected should be treated with inhaled steroids and inhaled beta agonists. It is recommended that these patients initially undergo spirometry, with bronchodilator responsiveness testing. Some favor bronchoprovocation with methacholine to better assess for underlying asthma, but this is not needed in all patients. If patients respond partially, continued stepwise asthma therapy is indicated.
I. Treatment for NAEB entails inhaled steroids and patients usually respond within weeks of initiation of therapy. As stated previously, these patients have normal spirometry without bronchodilator responsiveness. The diagnosis can be confirmed by an examination of sputum for eosinophils.
J. If response is incomplete or there is no response to the initial empiric strategies, treatment for GERD is warranted. If patients have symptoms of reflux, it is reasonable to initiate a proton pump inhibitor (PPI) and lifestyle modifications to decrease reflux. Some recommend 24-hour esophageal pH monitoring to establish the diagnosis in patients without clear GERD symptoms.
K. If all the previously mentioned empiric trials are ineffective, further diagnostic evaluation is appropriate. In most cases, CT scan of the chest, full pulmonary function testing (lung volumes, spirometry, DLco [diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide]), and bronchoscopy are recommended.

