Deep venous thrombosis (DVT) is caused by intravascular deposits of predominantly fibrin, RBCs, platelets, and WBC components, accumulating in a vein and producing obstruction to venous outflow and/or vessel wall inflammation. The clinical manifestations depend on the severity of these inflammatory processes. Often the initial sign is a pulmonary embolism (PE).

A. Detailed history taking should look for previous episodes and for inherited disorders of protein C and S deficiency, antithrombin (AT) III deficiency, or an abnormal factor V (factor VLEIDEN). With such deficiencies there is a strong family history of recurrent DVT or PE that presents at an early age; >80% of patients with protein C deficiency have had an episode of DVT or PE by age 40. Patients with ATIII deficiency have a similar presentation and also may have a history of failure to be anticoagulated with heparin. Other hypercoagulable causes are the MTHFR (5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase) gene mutation, prothrombin gene mutation, and activated protein C resistance. Some are acquired, such as the anticardiolipin antibodies. It is important to obtain a complete drug and medication history, including use of estrogen or oral contraceptives. A history of frequent abortions with a prolonged partial thromboplastin time (PTT) should make one suspect a lupus anticoagulant (i.e., anticardiolipin antibodies). This also is present in some collagen vascular diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus. Surgery that requires >30 minutes and certain surgical procedures (orthopedics, those involving trauma to lower limbs [e.g., knee surgery, urologic, gynecologic]) are associated with increased incidence of DVT. Other risk factors are trauma, pregnancy, puerperium, congestive heart failure (CHF), myocardial infarction, cerebrovascular accidents, extremity paralysis, malignancy (especially of the prostate, breast, or pancreas), obesity, varicose veins, immobilization, use of estrogens, smoking, and age. All of these may increase the risk of DVT by stasis and/or increased activation of coagulation.
B. Pain is present in approximately 50% of patients with DVT. Swelling and tenderness to compression also are found in 75% of patients. The clinical diagnosis of DVT is not accurate. Thrombosis does not always produce complete obstruction or inflammation. In 30% of patients who have pain and swelling, there is proven DVT. The classic Homan sign (discomfort in the calf muscles on forced dorsiflexion of the foot) is not sensitive. It is noted in 33% of patients with positive venography and 50% with negative venography. Unilateral swelling associated with discoloration is an important sign that should alert one to the diagnosis.
C. The differential diagnosis includes ruptured Baker's cyst, muscle tear, cramp, hematoma, arthritis, bone disease, varicose veins, and postphlebitic syndrome. If no cause is apparent, consider noninvasive screening.
D. When the history and physical examination suggest DVT, ancillary tests such as noninvasive impedance plethysmography (IPG) and duplex ultrasound or invasive tests such as 125I and contrast venography will corroborate the diagnosis. Laboratory tests should include platelet count, prothrombin time (PT), PTT, and D-dimer. The D-dimer test has emerged as a good screening tool; a positive result supports further workup to rule out DVT and pulmonary embolism in the appropriate clinical setting, and a negative result does not exclude it.
E. Noninvasive diagnostic tests available are IPG and duplex ultrasonography (D-US). IPG is good for detecting proximal vein thrombosis and/or recurrent DVT but is insensitive for detecting nonobstructive proximal thrombosis and calf vein thrombosis. Its sensitivity is 83%-93%; its specificity is 83%-90%. It must be repeated serially to increase its sensitivity. False-positive results may occur with CHF, postoperative leg swelling, excessive leg tension, or external compression. D-US (sensitivity, 95%; specificity, 98%) is the ideal method of screening patients with suspected DVT. It is good for detecting proximal but not calf vein thrombosis. Calf vein thrombosis usually requires no treatment other than bed rest and elevation of the extremity. In 20%-30% of cases, however, the thrombus may extend into the popliteal vein, and full anticoagulation is required because of the increased incidence of PE. Extension into the popliteal system often is missed on initial noninvasive tests but may be seen if the examination is repeated after 3–5 days.
F. 125I with fibrinogen detects fibrin accretion to a thrombus and will be positive with active ongoing clotting. It detects calf vein thrombosis in 90% of cases and proximal vein thrombosis in 60%-80%. Fibrinogen carries with it the risks inherent with the use of any blood product, including allergic reactions and transmittal of infections. It is contraindicated in iodine allergy, pregnancy, and lactation. The combined approach of 125I and IPG was positive in 81 of 86 patients with positive venograms; both tests were negative in 104 of 114 patients who had negative venograms. This is a useful approach if DVT is suspected clinically and 125I is inconclusive. Venography is the gold standard but is invasive, is not always available, and may not visualize the deep venous system. It may itself cause a DVT.
G. If the diagnosis is confirmed, begin treatment. Standard treatment includes IV heparin, SC heparin, low molecular weight heparins, oral anticoagulants, bed rest, and extremity elevation. Patients with protein C deficiency may have skin necrosis and increased sensitivity to warfarin. Start therapy with IV heparin bolus, 5000 U, followed by continuous infusion of heparin, approximately 1000 U/h or 800–10,000 U SC heparin every 6–8 hours. Monitor activated PTT at 6 hours and thereafter until stabilized at 1.5-2 times control values. Obtain a baseline platelet count and monitor every 3 days while the patient is taking heparin. Watch for heparin-associated thrombocytopenia and heparin-associated thrombosis. Alternatively, Lovenox twice daily at a dosage of 1 mg/kg SC every 12 hours or at dosage of 1.5 mg/kg once a day could be used instead of heparin. Begin warfarin sodium on the first day by instituting the estimated daily maintenance dosage (5–10 mg). Maintain INR at 2.0-3.0. It usually takes 72-96 hours for the INR to reach this range, and heparin should be continued until the INR is at this level. Treatment should last at least 12 weeks.

