Depression occurs in children, adolescents, adults, and the elderly. It is found in all ethnic groups, has high prevalence, and is a significant cause of disability worldwide. Following hypertension, it is the most commonly encountered chronic illness in general medical practice. It can be an emotion, a specific disease entity, or a symptom of another mental or medical illness such as schizophrenia or thyroid dysfunction. It can also be iatrogenically induced by medications such as glucocorticoids, narcotics, and benzodiazepines.
Dysphoria, a milder form of major depression, occurs in 5% of the general population, with women and persons aged 25-44 years most at risk. The full syndrome of major depression carries significant morbidity and mortality in terms of suicide risk and poorer outcome of concomitant medical disorders. Many patients with depression present first to the primary care physician with somatic concerns and seek a medical diagnosis or treatment for anxiety or “nerves,” which often leads to overlooking the proper diagnosis and delaying treatment.
A. Depression is a clinical syndrome without a specific laboratory test to confirm the diagnosis; comprehensive clinical assessments provide the main data.
B. Criteria for diagnosis of major depression include having at least five of nine symptoms present daily or almost daily during the same 2-week period and indicative of a change from previous functioning. Symptoms are (1) depressed mood, (2) markedly reduced interest or pleasure in activities, (3) significant weight loss or gain or decrease or increase in appetite, (4) insomnia or hypersomnia, (5) psychomotor agitation or retardation, (6) fatigue or low energy, (7) feelings of worthlessness or inordinate guilt, (8) difficulty concentrating or indecisiveness, and (9) recurrent thoughts of death or suicide or a suicide attempt. Broad differential diagnosis must include organic mood disorder, depressed, and a major depression.
C. A screening battery of laboratory tests helps rule out specific organic causes. In combination with the history and physical examination, findings may suggest more specific laboratory studies (see D). Specialized tests that are sensitive, but not specific, to major depression include the dexamethasone suppression test, the thyrotropin-releasing hormone stimulation test, and polysomnography.
D. Differential diagnosis for organic causes includes substance abuse or dependence and use of certain prescription drugs. The latter group includes antihypertensives, hormones, analgesics, anticancer drugs, tiparkinsonian drugs, antianxiety and hypnotic drugs, and GI drugs; endocrine and metabolic disorders (especially thyroid and adrenal); nutritional deficiencies (vitamin B1, niacin, folate, vitamin B12); and heavy metal toxicity (e.g., lead). Depression in alcoholics may resolve with abstinence. Depressive symptoms follow stroke in up to 60% of cases within 2 years. Treatment of underlying medical problems may lead to resolution of depression; if not, standard antidepressant treatment strategies often are effective.
E. Initial antidepressant regimens, especially in patients whose illness is medically complex, often involve selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs; e.g., fluoxetine, sertraline, paroxetine). Secondary amine tricyclics such as nortriptyline and desipramine are an important alternative, especially for comorbid chronic pain. These may have less anticholinergic side effects and therefore are better tolerated than amitriptyline or doxepin. If SSRIs and tricyclics fail or are contraindicated, other choices include bupropion, nefazodone, venlafaxine, or monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs; phenelzine, tranylcypromine). Low-dose trazodone (note priapism as a possible side effect in males) is sometimes used for insomnia, in combination with activating agents such as fluoxetine. Choose medication to specific target symptoms (e.g., agitation versus psychomotor retardation) and address side effect profile. Watch for drug interactions with fluoxetine and MAOIs. MAOIs necessitate a tyramine-free diet. Amphetamine-based stimulants may mobilize patients who are apathetic and medically ill, but their long-term efficacy for major depression is uncertain.
F. Up to 50% of patients who are unipolar depressed with partial or no response to antidepressant therapy may respond more fully to the addition of lithium. More controversial augmentation strategies include buspirone supplementation (especially in agitated depression), thyroid supplementation, combination therapy of fluoxetine with a tricyclic, and combination therapy of an MAOI with a tricyclic; the last two approaches involve a significant risk of drug interactions.
G. Growing evidence suggests that bright-light therapy may suffice in some cases of winter depression; more standard somatic therapies also are effective.
H. Recent studies have shown the need for a combination of antidepressant and antipsychotic drugs rather than single-agent therapy to treat psychotic depression.
K. A chronic course of at least 2 years and a less severe depressive picture suggest a dysthymic disorder, which can co-occur with major depression. Dysphoria or fluctuating mood instability is also characteristic of a range of chronic personality disorders that vary in responsiveness to psychotherapeutic interventions.
L. An identifiable stressor, maladaptive symptoms lasting <6 months, and a generally less severe depressive picture suggest an adjustment disorder with depressed mood, which usually resolves with time and supportive psychotherapy.

