A. Diffuse muscle pain has multiple etiologies, including viral syndromes (especially influenza and coxsackie), polymyalgia rheumatica (PMR), drug-induced myopathies (e.g., fibrates and statins), and hypothyroidism. The inflammatory myopathies (dermatomyositis and polymyositis) are usually painless or minimally painful, but myalgias are not infrequently seen with these disorders. Laboratory tests should include a CBC, ESR, C-reactive protein (CRP), creatine kinase (CK), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH).
B. Although weakness can be difficult to ascertain in the setting of pain, prominent weakness or elevation of muscle enzymes should prompt an evaluation directed toward disorders affecting muscle (muscular dystrophies, myositis, drug-induced myopathy) or other causes of weakness.
C. The typical presentation for PMR is an abrupt onset of bilateral shoulder and neck pain causing difficulty raising the arms over the head. Patients are almost without exception >50 years and usually >60 years. The lower back, pelvic girdle, and thighs can also be involved, and a few patients will present with pain starting in these areas. Most patients will describe more than half an hour of increased pain on waking, and constitutional symptoms (fever, weight loss, night sweats, anorexia) are not uncommon. Prominent synovitis or peripheral edema on examination can be seen with remitting seronegative symmetric synovitis with pitting edema (RS3PE), which some consider to be in the clinical spectrum of PMR. The inflammatory markers ESR and CRP are usually elevated, but a normal value does not exclude the diagnosis of PMR. Elevations in the muscle enzymes (CK, AST, ALT) are not consistent with the diagnosis of PMR and should be explained by alternative diagnoses. For patients with a more long-standing and insidious history of diffuse pain, consider fibromyalgia and vitamin D deficiency. Treatment of PMR usually requires modest dosages of steroids (e.g., 5 mg tid). Usually the patient improves dramatically within 48 hours; if not, the diagnosis should be questioned. Once symptoms are controlled, steroids are slowly tapered. The disease, an average, lasts for 18 months.
D. A critical distinction is to assess for giant cell arteritis (GCA). GCA should be considered a “can't miss" diagnosis because of the high risk of blindness and stroke with delay in therapy. All patients with a clinical history consistent with PMR should be specifically questioned for headache, scalp pain, jaw claudication, and visual symptoms (amaurosis fugax, blurring, or diplopia). Physical examination should also include palpation of the temporal arteries and comparison of pulses in the extremities. A funduscopic examination should be performed if visual symptoms are present. If GCA is suspected by history or physical examination, the patient should be started on high-dose (1 mg/kg of prednisone) steroids and a temporal artery biopsy should be arranged. If the patient has visual symptoms, pulse dose (1000 mg IV methylprednisolone QD for 3 days) steroids should be given followed by high-dose steroids. Treatment for up to 14 days with steroids will not affect the biopsy results.

