Complaints of dizziness from a patient may represent a variety of different sensations. Therefore, a careful history is extremely important to identify, as best as possible, the specific sensations experienced by the patient, which will assist the clinician in narrowing the differential diagnosis of this common symptom.
Specific words are often used by patients to describe vestibular versus nonvestibular dizziness. A feeling of “spinning,” motion sickness, or being “drunk,” with the sense of imbalance, falling, or tilting to one side is common in vestibular dizziness. The sensation of spinning “inside the head" while the environment remains stable may imply nonvestibular causes. Light-headedness or a “swimming” sensation without specific motion is a common complaint suggestive of low perfusion or glucose states.
A. Nonvestibular dizziness has a variety of etiologies. The light-headedness experienced before a faint is known as a presyncopal event. The mechanism of this symptom is reduced blood flow to the entire brain. Disorders that can cause a decrease in systemic blood pressure include the vasovagal response and orthostatic hypotension. Reduced cardiac output in arrhythmias, cardiomyopathy, or cardiac valvular disease results in cardiogenic presyncope. Hypoglycemia in patients with diabetes who are taking insulin or sulfonylureas may cause shakiness, palpitations, fatigue, and presyncope. Hyperventilation that results in reduced arterial Pco2 causing cerebral vasoconstriction is a common cause of dizziness in young patients with anxiety or panic disorder. These patients often complain of perioral or bilateral finger numbness and tingling. Nausea and diaphoresis, blurring and dimness of vision, and skin pallor may accompany any of the previously mentioned presyncopal events.
A variety of drug reactions can cause dizziness, either through direct ototoxicity (aminoglycosides) or through cerebellar damage (phenytoin, primidone, alcohol). Sedating medications produce a sensation of cloudiness or giddiness that may be interpreted by a patient as dizziness.
B. Acute vertigo involves an intense sense of rotation often exacerbated by head movement. It may result from a peripheral lesion (of the labyrinth or vestibular nerve) or a central lesion (i.e., brainstem or cerebellar vestibular system) and represents unilateral loss of vestibular function. Nausea, vomiting, pallor, and fatigue are often present. Walking is difficult. Spontaneous nystagmus is nearly always present on examination.
C. Central vertigo is suspected in an older patient with a history of hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, and cardiovascular or cerebrovascular disease. Hearing loss is rare, inability to walk is prominent, and nystagmus changes directions of the fast phase when the patient looks away from the lesion. Brainstem or cerebellar infarction or hemorrhage needs to be ruled out with urgent head CT or MRI. Treatment should focus on treatment of the underlying pathophysiology. Antiplatelet or anticoagulation therapy may be indicated. Acute surgical decompression of the brainstem may be necessary to treat a rapidly expanding cerebellar hemorrhage. Recovery from a central insult to vestibular system takes days to weeks. Multiple sclerosis (MS) may present with an attack of central vertigo in a younger patient (5% of MS cases). MRI of the brain may show a multifocal white matter disease on T2 or FLAIR (fluid-attenuated inversion recovery) sequences.
D. Peripheral vertigo is suspected in a patient with history of previous infection involving the ear, prominent hearing loss, systemic symptoms, and severe nausea and vomiting. Vestibular neuronitis accounts for 90% of cases of peripheral vertigo in younger patients. Flu-like illness within 2 weeks of the onset of dizziness is reported by 50% of patients. Steroids and antiviral agents have no proven use in this condition in randomized trials but are often used. Acute suppurative labyrinthitis is a rare bacterial infection of a labyrinth leading to rapid and profound loss of auditory and vestibular function. Diagnosis is suspected in patients with recent history of bacterial otitis media, meningitis, or cholesteatoma with persistent severe ear and mastoid pain, fever, and loss of hearing and vestibular function. An urgent head CT scan with special attention to temporal bone windows and rapid treatment with antibiotics is imperative.
E. Recurrent spontaneous vertigo is caused by sudden temporary and usually reversible impairment of resting neural activity in one labyrinth or its central connections. The typical length of dysfunction is minutes (central vertigo, transient ischemic attacks) to hours (peripheral vertigo).
F. Meniere's disease involves recurrent attacks of peripheral vertigo associated with fluctuating low-frequency hearing loss. The classic symptomatic triad is vertigo, tinnitus, and hearing loss. The pathophysiology is thought to involve distention of the membranous labyrinth in one or both ears that changes in severity. During a period of increased pressure in the labyrinth, patients have a feeling of fullness in the affected ear, an increase in the chronic tinnitus and deafness in that ear, and acute vertigo. The severity of each attack varies greatly; at the onset of severe vertigo, some patients lose consciousness briefly. The duration is typically hours (in rare cases, attacks may last up to a few days). With repeated attacks, deafness increases. In most patients with Meniere's disease, deafness precedes episodic vertigo, but in some, episodes of vertigo precede deafness.
G. Patients with migraine may have attacks of vertigo accompanying headaches (up to 25% of migraine cases). Rarely, it may be the only manifestation of migraines. A trial of migraine prophylactic medication may be diagnostic.
H. Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo is a syndrome involving vertigo precipitated by specific head positions (e.g., looking up, lying on one side). Vertigo usually begins after a brief latent interval (a few seconds) after the head assumes the offending position. A change of position usually relieves symptoms rapidly. Most cases begin suddenly, without apparent cause; others follow head trauma. In older persons the syndrome may be caused by vascular insults in the inner ear. Symptoms commonly subside in a few months but may recur. In 50% of cases, no etiology can be identified. Bedside maneuvers (Dix-Hallpike, Epley) may be used in both the diagnosis and treatment of this disorder. Cases with atypical aspects of history or examination should raise suspicion for positional vertigo caused by posterior fossa lesions, including cerebellar tumors, medulloblastomas, cerebellar atrophy, and Chiari type I malformation.

