A. The term dysphagia is used to describe a sense of food sticking in the throat or difficulty swallowing. It can result from (1) abnormalities in preparing or delivering the food bolus to the esophagus (transfer or oropharyngeal dysphagia), (2) structural abnormalities of the esophagus (e.g., benign strictures, malignancy-related obstruction), (3) compression by extrinsic structures (e.g., the left atrium, aortic aneurysm, lymphadenopathy, tumors), or (4) motility disturbances of the esophagus (achalasia or diffuse esophageal spasm). Obtaining a detailed history is the first and perhaps most important step in evaluating dysphagia. Complaints isolated to solid food usually suggest esophageal obstruction, whereas liquid dysphagia is more often seen with motility disorders. Similarly, difficulty initiating a swallow or difficulty associated with nasal regurgitation in the setting of a recent cerbrovascular accident (CVA), Parkinson's disease, or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis strongly suggests a problem with oropharyngeal neuromuscular coordination. Long-standing intermittent solid food dysphagia in an otherwise healthy individual is commonly seen with benign rings, whereas new onset of progressive solid food dysphagia associated with weight loss is more often seen with malignancy or tight inflammatory strictures. Recently it has become recognized that young adults who present with food impactions may have a distinct condition (allergic eosinophilic esophagitis) that requires a high level of clinical suspicion to diagnose and treat appropriately. In patients with a history or temporal medical history to suggest an oropharyngeal or motility disorder, the evaluation may begin with a barium esophagram or modified barium swallow. Because of the relative insensitivity of barium studies in detecting esophageal mucosal disease, esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) should be part of the evaluation of any patient with the complaint of dysphagia.
B. When endoscopy is performed and a specific etiology for dysphagia is determined, diagnosis-specific treatment is undertaken. Strictures may be dilated with rubber or polyethylene bougies and balloon catheters. Active esophagitis and peptic strictures are treated with antisecretory agents, including H2-receptor antagonists and proton pump inhibitors. Occasionally severe reflux disease can cause dysphagia without anatomic obstruction. Options for treating obstructing esophageal cancers include laser photocoagulation, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, alcohol injection, and stenting. Their application depends on the extent and location of the tumor and the condition of the patient.
C. If the EGD results are normal, a motility disturbance or subtle esophageal ring should be suspected. Again, history is usually helpful, but esophageal manometry and barium esophagography with ingestion of a barium-soaked marshmallow, cookie, or pill can establish the etiology and exclude such treatable conditions as achalasia.
D. Abnormalities in the preparation and passage of the food bolus from the tongue to the pharynx and then into the esophagus (transfer dysphagia) are most commonly seen with acute CVAs or progressive neurologic disorders (see section A). The dysfunction may slowly improve over several weeks following a CVA, and temporary nasogastric feeding or placement of a gastrostomy tube may be needed. In patients with progressive neurologic disorders and oropharyngeal dysphagia, referral to a speech pathologist for specific directions on the optimal food consistency and neck position to facilitate swallowing can be useful. However, many patients will ultimately require gastrostomy tube placement for enteral feeding.
E. Abnormalities in esophageal peristalsis and lower esophageal sphincter (LES) pressure and coordination with peristalsis are known as motility disorders. Measurement of the esophageal intraluminal pressures via manometric probes may define (1) achalasia—aperistalsis of the esophageal body and incomplete LES relaxation; (2) diffuse esophageal spasm—intermittent, simultaneous contractions; (3) nutcracker esophagus-high-amplitude esophageal contractions; and (4) nonspecific motility disorder—nontransmitted, triple-peaked, or simultaneous contractions that do not meet criteria for the other defined motility disturbances. The frequent association of chest pain with liquid dysphagia in patients with motility disturbances may be the most dominant and disturbing symptom. Treatment of achalasia with forceful pneumatic balloon dilation is effective in 60%-95% of patients but is complicated by esophageal perforation in 2%-5% of cases. Botulinum toxin injection into the LES may provide a relatively short-lived but less risky alternative. Other measures, including serial traditional bougienage, nitrates, and calcium channel blockers, may provide some temporary but generally less effective relief. Surgery (Heller myotomy) provides relief in >90% of patients when performed by an experienced surgeon. The treatment of symptoms related to other motility disorders is more difficult because the effect of nitrates and calcium channel blockers is generally less consistent. Low-dose tricyclic antidepressants may provide effective symptom relief for these patients.
F. If esophagagoscopy and manometry are normal and symptoms persist, consider extraesophageal extrinsic compression by masses or adjacent structures. Barium esophagography may be more useful than endoscopy in this scenario. Mediastinal tumors, left atrial or thoracic aortic enlargement, and osteophytes from cervical degenerative disease are the most common causes.
G. In a substantial number of patients the evaluation yields no specific diagnosis. It is important to confirm the precise nature of symptoms to be certain the other symptoms are not being confused with true dysphagia. This would include the sense of a constant "lump in the throat” (“globus”) or postinflammatory sensitivity that could create symptoms interpreted as dysphagia. In the remaining patients, the symptoms may be related to emotional or psychiatric disorders or may be part of a more complex functional gastrointestinal disturbance (global visceral sensitivity).

