Heart failure (HF) is a significant cause of morbidity and mortality in the United States. It is estimated that 5 million patients currently have HF and approximately 550,000 patients are newly diagnosed each year. Early diagnosis and treatment of underlying and potentially reversible causes are essential to preventing the progression to more severe and debilitating symptoms.

A. The history and physical examination should focus on distinguishing between ischemic causes of HF (coronary artery disease [CAD]) and nonischemic causes of HF (valvular heart disease, diabetes, hypertension, alcohol abuse, neuromuscular disorders, and cardiomyopathies). The family history should be explored for premature CAD, HF, arrhythmias, and sudden cardiac death. The baseline ECG should be reviewed for evidence of myocardial infarction, conduction disturbances, and arrhythmias.
B. Approximately 40%-60% of patients with HF have evidence of CAD. Patients with angina and/or clinical suspicion for CAD should be referred for cardiac catheterization. Noninvasive testing for ischemia can also be considered, but cardiac catheterization should be performed in any patient in whom the diagnosis of CAD remains uncertain after noninvasive testing.
C. If CAD and ischemia are found, mechanical revascularization should be strongly considered. If left ventricular (LV) function is abnormal (i.e., ejection fraction [EF] <40%), then an assessment of myocardial viability should be performed. If viability is adequate, mechanical revascularization should be performed if the patient is otherwise a medically appropriate candidate.
D. Echocardiography is used to make the important clinical distinction between HF with either normal or abnormal systolic function and to assess valvular abnormalities, right-sided heart function, and chamber dimensions.
E. Primary anatomic abnormalities of valve structure (i.e., myxomatous mitral valve, bicuspid aortic valve) suggest HF is a result of valvular heart disease. Other causes include rheumatic heart disease, connective tissue disorders such as Marfan's syndrome, or calcific degeneration. When HF is secondary to significant primary valvular disease, referral for surgical intervention should be considered.
F. In patients with HF and nonischemic LV dysfunction, there are multiple other causes to consider. History should be specifically sought for drug and alcohol use, recent viral illness, and familial disorders. Systolic dysfunction can result from exposure to certain drugs (i.e., anthracyclines, trastuzumab, and cyclophosphamide) through hypersensitivity reactions by direct myocardial injury. Incessant atrial and ventricular tachycardias may also lead to nonischemic cardiomyopathies. Endomyocardial biopsy is required to establish the diagnosis of myocarditis. Many patients (20%-30%) will not have a definitive diagnosis despite extensive investigations and will be diagnosed with idiopathic cardiomyopathy. It is believed that many of these patients have either a familial disorder or a postviral etiology.
G. There are numerous causes of HF with preserved systolic function (also known as "diastolic heart failure"). This diagnosis is generally considered when the EF is >40%. Many of these patients will also exhibit abnormal diastolic function. Patients at risk for this type of HF are generally elderly females with diabetes and are hypertensive on presentation. In the absence of hypertension, restrictive cardiomyopathies should be considered. These disorders include infiltrative diseases (amyloid, sarcoid, and hemochromatosis), inherited myocardial diseases (hypertrophic cardiomyopathy), and radiation injury. Although the echocardiogram may have suggestive findings, cardiac biopsy is often necessary to diagnose infiltrative cardiomyopathies. Finally, constrictive pericardial disease should always be ruled out.
H. All patients with HF should have basic biochemical testing to look for renal dysfunction, anemia, electrolyte imbalances and thyroid dysfunction because these may contribute to HF symptoms and progression. Specific testing can assist in the diagnosis of hemochromatosis and amyloidosis. A cardiac biopsy may be useful in patients with acute myocarditis or if there is strong clinical suspicion of an infiltrative cardiomyopathy.

