Traditional medicine has viewed falls as the functional outcome of a primary medical condition. Medical conditions are worked up and ruled out; however, the reason for the fall often remains unexplained. With the aging of the population and the increased risk of falls with aging, geriatric medicine has embraced falls as a geriatric syndrome with a multiplicity of causes warranting careful analysis. With the cause suspected, therapeutic and preventive measures can be undertaken to prevent recurrence. Falls are associated with a subsequent decline in functional status, greater likelihood of nursing home placement, increased use of medical services, and a fear of falling in the individual.
The fall history takes into account that falls are under-reported. Knowing this, clinicians should ask about falls annually in the context of functional assessment and should establish the individual's baseline level of gait, balance, and use of assistive walking devices. Reported falls should be explored more fully by determining frequency (single or recurrent) and severity (minor injury such as soft tissue injury/sprain or major injury such as laceration requiring sutures, fractures, or head strike). The detail of the fall should be elicited in a systematic way from the faller or a witness. Distinguishing loss of consciousness, or not, is a critical feature, and the former should lead to a syncope workup. With no loss of consciousness there should be further differentiation into dizziness, or not, similarly leading to a "dizziness” workup where appropriate. Medication history, including over-the-counter and herbal medicines, and a history for environmental hazards, such as throw rugs, are key. Remember that most falls are multifactorial in origin.
A comprehensive physical examination includes vision, HEENT (head, eyes, ears, nose, and throat), cardiovascular, neurologic, musculoskeletal, gait/balance, and a heightened focus on any other areas suggested by the history. Vital signs should include orthostatic measurements of pulse and blood pressure, and pain should be assessed as the “fifth vital sign.” The systematic traditional examination should include an assessment of ambulation using a functional status tool such as the "Tinetti Gait and Balance” test or the timed “Get Up and Go" test.
There are many causes for falls, and usually many factors play a role.
1. Normal age-related changes, including declines in the following:
a. Visual, proprioceptive, and vestibular systems, which are necessary to maintain upright posture
b. Postural control manifested by increased postural sway
c. Autoregulatory mechanisms, which help to maintain blood pressure
d. Total body water, increasing the risk of dehydration and hypotension
2. Acute medical conditions, which undermine any already-compromised reserve
3. Lifetime accumulation of chronic medical conditions, especially ophthalmologic, ENT (ear, nose, and throat), cardiovascular, neurologic, rheumatologic, and orthopedic
4. Medications, including cardiac drugs, psychotropics, hypoglycemic agents, alcohol, and anticholinergics/antihistamines
5. Environmental hazards
6. Risk-taking behavior
7. Trip, slip, stumble, or loss-of-balance accident