Infertility is failure to conceive after 1 year of unprotected intercourse. It is a common problem, estimated to affect 8%-15% of married couples. Even before a couple is considered infertile, counseling should include a discussion of the menstrual cycle and appropriate timing of intercourse. In general, intercourse should occur about every 36-72 hours from 3–4 days before until 2 days after ovulation. It is important that sperm be available before ovulation. Ovulation usually occurs about 14 days before the subsequent menses or on about day 14 of a 28-day cycle.
Encourage couples who wish to time intercourse more precisely to use prospective methods to detect ovulation, such as home ovulation predictor kits that detect a surge in luteinizing hormone (LH). Basal body temperature charts may identify the day of ovulation retrospectively, so they are not as useful in timing intercourse.
Considerable controversy remains about what constitutes a basic and complete fertility evaluation. Cost-effectiveness is an important part of the decision-making process because many insurance plans cover little or none of the evaluation and treatment of infertility. The current trend is to minimize testing and to move more quickly through a treatment plan. For example, laparoscopy was once a standard part of a fertility evaluation; now its considerable expense is often avoided in favor of using resources for treatments, such as reproductive technologies. Often it is more cost-effective to refer the patient to a specialist before expensive testing is performed so that the remainder of the evaluation can be integrated into the overall treatment plan.
A. The couple should be present for the initial fertility evaluation. Take a complete reproductive history of the female partner, including past and current menstrual pattern, contraceptive use, sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), prior pregnancies, pelvic pain or dysmenorrhea, in utero exposure to diethylstilbestrol, and past gynecologic procedures. Review medical and family histories, use of medications, and coital pattern.
B. A complete physical examination includes body habitus, abnormal hair growth patterns, a careful thyroid examination, and exclusion of galactorrhea. Perform careful pelvic examination, ruling out pelvic masses. Tender nodularity in the posterior cul de sac or a fixed uterus suggests endometriosis.
C. Advanced age of the female partner (>35 years) is a strong risk factor for infertility. Initiate an evaluation after 6 months of unprotected intercourse and proceed more quickly than in younger women. Obtain a cycle day 3 follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) level to provide information on the success of various therapies, and quickly perform a basic evaluation. Consider an early referral to a specialist. Many women >40 years and those with elevated FSH levels may conceive only with eggs donated from younger women.
D. Ovulation may be evaluated in many ways. If the menstrual interval is >35 days, anovulation is likely. Obtain thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), FSH, and prolactin levels, and initiate treatment with clomiphene citrate. In women with normal menses, ovulation is likely if two to three cycles of basal body temperature charts are biphasic or if a LH surge is detected. A temperature elevation should be maintained for ≥11 days. Ovulation can be confirmed with a midluteal (usually day 21) progesterone level of >5 ng/ml. Use other laboratory tests sparingly; many physicians measure TSH and prolactin levels on all infertile women, regardless of ovulatory status. Serial ultrasound studies of ovulation add considerable expense and usually little information to a basic evaluation. A timed endometrial biopsy will document normal ovulation but adds expense and rarely influences decision making.
E. In general, a day 3 FSH level of >15 mIU/ml and estradiol >50 pg/ml predict a low success rate with reproductive technologies, and probably with most other fertility treatments. These values may vary considerably between laboratories.
F. If the female partner is anovulatory or oligomenorrheic and laboratory test results are normal, clomiphene citrate may be prescribed for up to three ovulatory cycles. After a spontaneous or progestin-induced menstrual cycle, the starting dosage is 50 mg for 5 days, starting on day 3, 4, or 5 of the cycle. Use basal body temperature charts to monitor ovulation. The dosage may be increased to 100 mg if anovulation persists, if basal body temperature rises after day 20, or if the luteal phase is <11 days. Of patients who will conceive, 80% do so within the first three ovulatory cycles.

