Fever in the transplant recipient is usually a sign of infection; hence, this review will focus on posttransplant infections. When infections have been rigorously excluded, it may be appropriate to investigate for other causes of fever such as allograft rejection, drug reactions, or neoplasia. Transplant recipients presenting with fever or signs of infection must be investigated urgently. Often, a “tissue diagnosis" (e.g., bronchoscopy with lavage and biopsy) is useful and should be obtained quickly. Empiric antimicrobial therapy is usually required before results are finalized.

A. It is useful to assess fever and infections according to the time period after kidney transplant. In the first month or so, infections are broadly similar to those that affect any hospitalized surgical patient. Thus, bacterial infections (of wounds, urinary tract, or lungs) predominate. Note that patients frequently have indwelling foreign material such as bladder catheters, urinary stents, and central lines; these devices can become infected. Prevention of early infection involves meticulous surgical technique. Treatment typically involves antibiotics and/or removal of infected foreign material. Of note, fever and mild allergic reactions to Thymoglobulin or OKT3 are not uncommon. These can be prevented and treated with acetaminophen + antihistamines + steroids. Other less common nonmicrobial causes of fever include severe allograft rejection and deep venous thrombosis.
B. From about the second to the sixth posttransplant month, the recipient is at relatively high risk of opportunistic infection because the recent cumulative dose of immunosuppression is high. However, “standard” infections of the lungs, urinary tract, and so on, may still occur (see earlier). Opportunistic infections may be viral (e.g., cytomegalovirus [CMV]), bacterial (e.g., pneumocystosis, nocardiosis), or fungal. Probably the most common are CMV infection and pneumocystosis. Symptomatic CMV infection is most common in CMV-positive donor-CMV-negative recipient pairings but can occur when the donor or recipient or both were harboring CMV before transplant. Common features of CMV infection include fever, malaise, leucopenia, and hepatitis; signs of pneumonitis, colitis, or retinitis may also be present. Demonstration of CMV in whole blood (by specialized tests) and in infected tissue (by immunochemistry) confirms the diagnosis. Treatment involves IV ganciclovir or PO valganciclovir and reduction in immunosuppression. Pneumocystic carinii pneumonia (PCP) usually presents with fever, malaise, shortness of breath, cough, hypoxia, and infiltrates on chest x-ray (CXR). Demonstration of the organism in induced sputum or lavaged/biopsied lung tissue confirms the diagnosis. Treatment involves high-dose sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim (SMX-TMP cotrimoxazole) and reduction in immunosuppression. Other opportunistic infections are similarly treated with specific antimicrobial drugs and reduction in immunosuppression.
C. After the first 6 months, the immunosuppressive load is lower and opportunistic infections become less common (although the risk is still somewhat increased). Thus, patients who present years after transplant with fever will often have infective causes similar to the general population. An important exception is the patient who receives late supplemental immunosuppression (e.g., Thymoglobulin for late acute rejection)—they are again at high risk of opportunistic infections. Avoiding excess immunosuppression is vital to minimize infection. Many centers prescribe (1) antiviral drugs such as valganciclovir for 3–4 months to prevent CMV infection (if the donor or recipient were CMV positive) and (2) SMX-TMP for 6–12 months to prevent PCP, urinary tract, and other bacterial infections.
D. When allografts fail and the recipients resume dialysis, immunosuppression is usually weaned to zero. Occasionally, this can lead to severe rejection of the failed allograft. Typical features are fever, allograft pain, and tenderness. Pyelonephritis must be excluded. The fever usually responds to steroids, but allograft nephrectomy is sometimes required.

