A. Flatulence is the passage of excess intestinal gas per rectum or the feeling that excessive gas is in the abdomen. Many patients complain of bloating, meaning that the abdomen becomes uncomfortably distended, usually after eating. Often, bloating is attributed to excessive intestinal gas. However, the perception that the passage of flatus or the amount of intestinal gas is excessive may be inaccurate because it may not actually be due to an abnormal amount of intestinal gas. Patients who complain of excessive flatus or of abdominal pain from gas sometimes have disorders of gut motility and a heightened pain response to intestinal gas, rather than excess intestinal gas. Some patients who complain of abdominal pain and bloating do have demonstrable disorders, such as peptic disease, gallbladder disease, Crohn's disease, or recurrent bowel obstruction. If, in addition to complaints of gaseousness, the patient has loss of weight, localized abdominal pain, vomiting, or blood in the stool, the suspicion of an organic GI disorder is increased.
B. Bacterial action on dietary substrates produces gas. Some patients can identify certain foods that aggravate the symptoms. A common offender is lactose, which causes excess intestinal gas production, cramps, and diarrhea in lactase-deficient individuals. Elimination of milk and milk products, legumes, cabbage, and similar foods may be effective in alleviating symptoms.
C. Perform sigmoidoscopy and a barium enema or colonoscopy to look for anorectal disease and colonic disorders. Reflux into the terminal ileum may identify Crohn's disease.
D. Upper GI and small bowel x-ray series may identify Crohn's disease of the small intestine, recurrent small bowel obstruction, or other disorders of the upper GI tract. Ultrasonography of the abdomen and pelvis may identify gallstones or an extraintestinal mass.
E. Testing gut motor function may help diagnose a motility disorder, neuropathy, or systemic disease such as scleroderma. Hydrogen breath testing can suggest carbohydrate malabsorption or small bowel bacterial overgrowth.
F. High-fiber bulking agents or so-called antispasmodics, such as dicyclomine, may be useful in patients who have no demonstrable treatable disorder or in whom a specific food has not been implicated. However, bulking agents, because they contain nondigestible substrates, may cause increased flatus. In some patients, stress reduction therapy may be helpful.