Gait disturbances denote a problem with the initiation and/or maintenance of walking. Many gait disturbances are not primarily of neurologic etiology (e.g., medication effects, illness-related deconditioning). Neurologic systems subserving gait include the frontal cortex and white matter, basal ganglia, diencephalon, midbrain, cerebellum, vestibular system, spinal cord, peripheral nervous system, and muscle. Thus, the initial evaluation of gait disturbances seeks to localize the dysfunction. Some common neurologic etiologies of gait disturbance are reviewed here.
A. A thorough history and physical examination should aim to determine the character and time course of the gait disturbance and associated symptoms and signs, such as rest tremor, bradykinesia, rigidity, numbness, weakness, back pain, urinary incontinence, dementia, and headaches. Alcohol use history, general medical history, and medication use should be reviewed.
B. A spastic gait typically results from upper motor neuron (UMN; cerebral or spinal cord) dysfunction from conditions such as cerebrovascular disease or demyelinating disorders, including multiple sclerosis (MS). In the older population, a common myelopathic etiology of spastic gait is cervical spondylosis. In the younger population, myelopathy may be associated with a demyelinating illness or trauma. This gait is characterized by stiffness in the lower extremities and circumduction of the leg. Scissoring can also be seen and results from increased tone in the adductors. Patients may exhibit exaggerated deep tendon reflexes (DTRs) and may exhibit a unilateral or bilateral Babinski's sign. Neuroimaging of the brain and spinal cord, typically with MRI, is important, as is a laboratory screen (e.g., for vitamin B12 deficiency). If a demyelinating illness is suspected, then MRI with and without contrast should be performed.
C. Gait disturbance from sensory dysfunction is typically wide-based with a stamping or slapping character. The examination may reveal reduced deep tendon reflexes, weakness and sensory loss that are greatest distally, and the presence of Romberg's sign (an abnormality in stance that occurs with eye closure). Sensory gait disturbance is usually from disorders affecting the peripheral nervous system or dorsal columns of the spinal cord. This type of gait was classically seen in patients with tabes dorsalis and neurosyphilis. Today it is more commonly seen as a result of large-fiber neuropathy secondary to certain vitamin deficiencies (B12) or diabetic peripheral neuropathy.
D. Neuromuscular disease can also cause an abnormal gait. The distinguishing features are that of high step-page gait to compensate for problems such as foot drop. Patients with illnesses such as myopathy will present with proximal weakness and report difficulty climbing stairs. Weakness of the hip girdle can also lead to a waddling gait, which is a result of excess pelvic rotation. Electromyography would be helpful in either of these scenarios to look for signs of neuropathy or myopathy.
E. Extrapyramidal disorders arise from basal ganglia dysfunction. Associated symptoms and signs include rest tremor, slowness, and rigidity, which could suggest Parkinson's disease. The parkinsonian gait is usually associated with flexed posture, shuffling, decreased arm swing, difficulty initiating, en bloc turning, and festination. Chorea is seen in Huntington's disease. Dystonia, an involuntary contraction of muscles, can also be a cause of gait abnormality.
F. A cerebellar gait disorder can result from an infarct, tumor, alcohol, or demyelination. The lesion is primarily found in the flocculonodular or anterior lobes of the cerebellum. The typical cerebellar gait is ataxic-wide-based and unsteady. Tandem walking may be difficult or impossible. Cerebellar gait disorders are usually, but not always, associated with other cerebellar signs such as intention tremor, dysmetria, rebound, and hypotonia. MRI is the diagnostic test of choice.
G. A frontal gait disturbance is common in older patients and is also known as gait apraxia. Typically no weakness or sensory loss is found. Patients walk with a wide base, short stride, and shuffling steps, and feet appear to be “sticking to the floor," with difficulty initiating gait and en bloc turning. Dementia, bilateral grasp reflexes, and a history of urinary incontinence may be present. Etiologies of frontal gait disorder include normal-pressure hydrocephalus, severe small vessel disease in the basal ganglia or periventricular white matter, or large frontal lobe tumors. MRI is essential to demonstrate ventricular size, the degree of white matter disease, and presence of tumors.
H. Toxins are one of the most common causes of gait difficulty, including excess alcohol intake. Certain prescription or nonprescription drugs and metabolic derangement can also have important effects on balance and gait.
I. Psychogenic gait is a diagnosis of exclusion. Astasia-abasia is the term used to denote such bizarre gait; patients may exhibit dramatic fluctuation over time, exaggerated caution, and slowness.

