Pruritus is an unpleasant sensation that provokes the desire to scratch. In at least half of cases when the workup is concluded, one is left with a diagnosis of idiopathic. It is frequently multifactorial. In the elderly, xerosis is common and careful attention to moisturization may reduce symptoms whether pruritus is idiopathic (common) or caused by systemic illness. Regardless of the underlying cause, most patients have maximal itching at bedtime. There are many pruritic dermatoses, but relatively few of these cause generalized itching. Generalized pruritus can be divided into conditions in which there is an associated dermatosis and those in which pruritus is a symptom of a noncutaneous disease.

A. Physical examination alone is sufficient to diagnose most primary cutaneous pruritic diseases. In the absence of an obvious primary lesion, a medical history may uncover occult dermatoses. For example, xerotic (dry) skin often itches just after bathing. Scabies may affect multiple household members and can be a venereally transmitted condition. Atopic dermatitis often appears in successive generations and is associated with asthma and allergic rhinitis.
B. The two most common causes of generalized pruritus are xerosis and atopic dermatitis. Xerosis is most prominent on the anterior legs and lateral arms. The plaques have fine fissures that look like a cracked pot (“erythema craquele"). The lesions of atopic dermatitis are thickened (lichenified) and excoriated. Occasionally patients with a psychosis will pick or scratch themselves and may bring a “sample” of “parasites” removed from the skin to the visit. On careful examination these are negative.
C. Diagnosis often can be confirmed by a skin biopsy. If scabies is suspected, examine the superficial contents of a burrow by performing a skin scraping.
D. Xerosis results in a dull appearance of the skin, with mild flakiness or scaling. It frequently coexists with other problems, particularly in the elderly. Also consider irritant or allergic contact dermatitis in this group. Causes include topical alcohol, harsh soap, wool clothing, detergent, and fabric softeners.
E. In the absence of an obvious cutaneous cause of generalized pruritus, empirically treat for xerosis with moisturizers. If the pruritus persists, a laboratory work-up is indicated and should include a hemogram, serum chemistries, glucose tolerance test, thyroid function studies, urinalysis, and chest radiography.
F. Pruritus rarely predates the diagnosis of systemic malignancy, except in Hodgkin's disease, where 6% of cases present with pruritus alone. If after a routine workup there are no localizing signs of malignancy, further evaluation usually is not indicated.
G. Polycythemia vera is associated with pruritus after quick temperature change (e.g., bathing). Itching occurs commonly in leukemia and rarely in iron deficiency states, even in the absence of other signs and symptoms.
H. Pruritus often is the first symptom of biliary cirrhosis and extrahepatic biliary obstruction. An elevated serum alkaline phosphatase level is characteristic.
I. The pruritus of diabetes mellitus occurs in <5% of patients and is not correlated with disease severity.
J. Hyperthyroidism may produce generalized pruritus that improves when the patient becomes euthyroid. Most cases of pruritus with hypothyroidism are secondary to xerosis.
K. Chronic renal failure commonly produces generalized pruritus in patients with BUN >50 mg/dl. Dialysis may produce paroxysms of intense itching. Phototherapy with ultraviolet B (UVB) may relieve itching in these patients.
L. Although psychogenic pruritus is a common cause of itching, consider it only after all other causes have been ruled out.

