Patients with goiters usually are euthyroid but can have significant hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism, compressive symptoms of dysphagia or choking, and concerns about the appearance of the goiter. Common types of goiter include multinodular goiter (MNG) and those associated with hypothyroidism (Hashimoto's thyroiditis) or hyperthyroidism (Graves' disease). Less commonly, goiters are produced by consumption of goitrogens. Lithium commonly induces a modest goiter. Rarer goitrogens include kelp, the antithyroidal medications propylthiouracil and methimazole, and cassava root, rutabaga, and turnips in association with an iodine-deficient diet. Excess iodine, including iodine-containing medications(amiodarone), occasionally can cause significant goiters. Iodine treatment during pregnancy has been associated with goiter in newborns. Endemic goiter has essentially disappeared in the United States because of adequate iodine intake, but about 200 million people around the world have it. Rarely, thyroid cancer or metastasis from other malignancies can cause a goiter through nodule growth.

A. Physical examination of the thyroid starts with careful visual inspection while the patient is swallowing. Often the outline of the entire goiter can be seen because the thyroid gland moves with swallowing. Next, palpate the entire gland during repeated swallows to characterize the goiter as diffuse or nodular, and identify any dominant nodules. Nodules longer than 1 cm should have a fine needle aspiration (see the chapter Thyroid Nodule). If the inferior border of the goiter is not easily palpable, try palpation with the patient supine and the neck moderately extended. If the inferior border is still not palpable, the patient may have a substernal goiter.
B. Measure serum concentrations of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) and free thyroxine (FT4). If the TSH is completely suppressed (“undetectable”), the patient is hyperthyroid. If the TSH is >10 μU/ml, the patient is hypothyroid. If the TSH is normal, the patient typically is euthyroid. If the TSH is mildly but not completely suppressed, the thyroid gland is producing a slight excess of thyroid hormone. This typically occurs in patients with MNGs that develop autonomously functioning nodules and cause subclinical hyperthyroidism. Some of these patients may develop frank hyperthyroidism, but most remain with goiters that are autonomously functioning. All such patients should be treated.
C. Hypothyroidism with goiter usually is caused by the autoimmune disease lymphocytic (or Hashimoto's) thyroiditis. Autoantibodies destroy parts of the thyroid. The goiters typically are modest in size, 2–3 times normal, and slightly nodular (bosselated) and firmer than normal thyroid tissue because there are areas of fibrosis, inflammation, and active follicles. Treat with T4 replacement.
D. Euthyroid patients with goiters usually are older adults with MNG. One theory on the formation of MNG (simple or nonimmunologic goiters) is that there is underproduction of thyroid hormone with a compensatory increase in TSH that stimulates goiter formation. Therefore a common, but now not commonly accepted, therapy is T4 suppression to remove the TSH stimulation. However, T4 therapy in older adults must be administered cautiously, starting at a low dosage, perhaps 0.05 mg/day, and keeping TSH within the normal range while increasing the dosage. MNG can slowly develop autonomous functioning nodules that produce enough hormone to cause hyperthyroidism in combination with exogenous T4. Therefore patients should be aware of the symptoms of hyperthyroidism and have TSH monitored at least every year after achieving a steady dose of T4. Substernal and large goiters may respond to radioactive 131I, so surgical treatment for goiter rarely is necessary. Large substernal goiters can cause superior venocaval syndrome, and some patients have signs of obstruction if they raise their arms above their head (Pemberton's sign). Occasionally surgery is done because of a patient's concern about appearance, or persistent obstructive symptoms.
E. Hyperthyroid patients with diffuse goiters usually have autoimmune Graves' disease. Thyroid-stimulating antibodies typically cause a diffuse enlargement of the entire gland. A unilateral asymmetric goiter associated with hyperthyroidism can occur in patients with a large functioning adenoma (Plummer's disease). Treatment of hyperthyroidism usually decreases the size of these goiters (see section on Hyperthyroidism).

