Expectoration of blood from the respiratory tract, hemoptysis, is a common medical condition best managed through a stepwise evaluation. Hemoptysis can range from mild blood-tinged sputum to massive, life-threatening bleeding.
In the United States, the most common cause of hemoptysis is respiratory infection causing local trauma to airway mucosal surfaces and resulting in blood-tinged sputum. In the majority of cases, symptoms abate when the infection clears. Patients with chronic respiratory infections can develop bronchiectasis: airway dilation after recurrent inflammation and mucous plugging. These patients usually have chronic cough and phlegm, which can at times become bloody. Occasionally, in severe bronchiectasis as occurs in patients with cystic fibrosis, airways become markedly dilated and an adjacent bronchial artery ruptures with subsequent massive hemoptysis.
Patients with hemoptysis often worry that the cause is lung cancer. Less than 10% of patients with lung cancer will initially present with hemoptysis; as stated earlier, hemoptysis is much more likely to be caused by infection. Bronchogenic carcinoma should be a consideration in any patient with hemoptysis in the absence of infectious symptoms. Former or active smokers are of particular concern. Malignancies that metastasize to lung, such as renal cell, colon, melanoma, and breast cancer, should also be considered in proper context.
Less common etiologies include pulmonary infarction, mitral stenosis, congestive heart failure, tuberculosis, catamenial (menstrual), arteriovenous malformations, coagulopathy, foreign body, and vasculitis. Up to one third of cases of hemoptysis are “idiopathic,” and most of these cases resolve on their own within 6 months.
A. A careful history and physical examination are imperative for evaluation. The first issue to clarify is the source of bleeding because “pseudohemoptysis” with blood from the nasooropharynx or GI tract can be confused with true hemoptysis.
B. Once it is clear that blood originates from the respiratory tract, it is important to clarify if it is a small amount of blood mixed with purulent phlegm or more substantive bleeding.
C. If the hemoptysis is only mild blood-streaked sputum and the patient is an otherwise healthy nonsmoker who is <40 years of age, a chest x-ray (CXR) to assess for infiltrate or mass followed by further conservative management is advised. If the patient has risk factors for malignancy, a bronchoscopy is recommended to rule out endobronchial lesions.
D. If frank blood is expectorated or repeated episodes of bleeding occur, an initial workup includes CXR, CBC, coagulation studies, and urinalysis (UA). This almost always warrants inpatient evaluation.
E. At this point, most patients are treated empirically for infection, but most warrant further evaluation. The next step is either a high-resolution chest CT or a bronchoscopy, depending on the most likely etiology for bleeding. Bronchoscopy is most useful to look for endobronchial masses. A high-resolution chest CT can reveal parenchymal abnormalities that could be missed by plain CXR. In most cases, a clinician will start with one test and if it is negative move to the other complementary test. A word of caution: Bronchoscopic evaluation with a normal CXR is usually low yield but deemed necessary, especially in men, smokers, those >40 years, and in cases of bleeding lasting ≥1 week.
F. Massive hemoptysis, conservatively defined as >200 ml in 24 hours, is a potentially life-threatening condition that requires urgent management. Airway stabilization is followed by evaluation for the source of bleeding. Interventional bronchial artery angiography offers diagnostic and therapeutic options because a bleeding vessel can be embolized. However, embolization carries a 10% risk of spinal artery embolization with paralysis and should be performed only by an experienced operator. Surgical resection is the usual alternative when embolization is too high risk or technically impossible. If the bleeding stops, evaluation as one would for non-massive hemoptysis is appropriate.
G. In nonmassive hemoptysis, treatment is based on presumed etiology. Most of the time, this includes treatment of infection or definitive therapy for underlying malignancy. Recurrent nonmassive hemoptysis is also treated with embolization or resection if conservative management is unsuccessful.

