A. Falls, especially in older persons, raise suspicion for hip fractures, particularly of the femoral neck and intertrochanteric region, but also of the acetabulum, elsewhere in the pelvis, or of the tip of the greater trochanter. Chronic overuse injuries from weightbearing exercise can produce stress fractures of the pelvis, and atraumatic pelvic “insufficiency” fractures can occur in older persons, particularly those with osteoporosis. Radiography and often more advanced imaging techniques are needed to rule out fracture.
B. Pain felt in the groin with examination of the hip is suggestive of hip joint disease. Groin pain with “log-rolling" the leg is probably the most specific finding because this maneuver does not stress the knee, back, or hip girdle musculature. A positive Thomas test to detect hip joint flexion contracture, in which a patient is unable to keep the affected leg on the examining table while the other leg is allowed to dangle off the table with the knee bent, is suggestive of serious disease. Pain of gradual onset is most suggestive of osteoarthritis (OA) but can occur with seronegative inflammatory arthritis (spondyloarthropathies) as well. Pain of rapid onset demands consideration of infection, avascular necrosis, or a non-infectious inflammatory arthritis. In some conditions, such as many cases of osteoarthritis and most of polymyalgia rheumatica, pain on motion of the hip joint is felt in a broader distribution down the thigh as far as the knee. Indeed sometimes patients complain of knee pain and the problem is only in the hip..
C. Isolated buttock pain is a less common presentation of hip arthritis but is a common presentation of degenerative disease in the lumbosacral (LS) spine (with or without spinal stenosis or nerve root impingement) or of degenerative or inflammatory disease of the sacroiliac (SI) joint. In the absence of neurologic deficit, the physical examination is usually nondiagnostic. Exquisite tenderness at the ischial tuberosity is suggestive of ischial bursitis, although in many cases pelvic fracture should still be ruled out.
D. An anteroposterior (AP) radiograph of the pelvis is often sufficient to diagnose osteoarthritis of the hip, degenerative or inflammatory arthritis of the SI joint, or pelvic fracture. However, depending on the location of symptoms, more detailed evaluation for fracture often includes AP and frog-leg views of the hip, anterior and posterior oblique views of the acetabulum, or Ferguson views of the SI joints. Excess fluid in the hip joint is often apparent from changes in soft-tissue planes. Avascular necrosis is generally not apparent on plain radiography until several weeks after onset. Evaluation of the LS spine by AP and lateral views is usually sufficient to establish degenerative disease; radiologically diagnosing nerve root and spinal cord impingement requires more advanced imaging.
E. Both CT and MRI are much more sensitive than plain radiographs for diagnosing fractures and should be considered if clinical suspicion is high despite normal plain films or if symptoms persist. Bone scans are also sensitive for fractures starting about 3 days after injury. MRI is sometimes needed to determine whether excess fluid is present in the hip joint or early in the course of avascular necrosis. CT and especially MRI are also more sensitive for detecting inflammatory disease of the SI joint but are often not clinically necessary. CT is an effective evaluation for lumbar spinal stenosis, and MRI is useful for both spinal stenosis and nerve root compression.
F. Aspiration of the hip joint, under imaging guidance, is needed if there is suspicion of an infected joint. Suspicion for such is increased by the presence of acute onset; atraumatic, severe pain, particularly with a positive Thomas test; radiographic evidence of hip effusion; and/or fever.
G. Lateral hip pain associated with tenderness over the greater trochanter is a common syndrome caused by either gluteus medius tendonitis or trochanteric bursitis. Patients with fibromyalgia usually have pain and tenderness in this region as well but usually bilaterally and in association with numerous other tender sites.

