Hypernatremia is defined as a plasma sodium >145 mmol/L. There is a direct relationship between mortality and increasing plasma sodium. The levels of plasma sodium that are >180 mmol/L carry the highest mortality. Patients who are susceptible are often those who have limited access to water. Commonly, the elderly who are physically incapacitated or very young infants are at an increased risk.

A. Hypernatremia is usually caused by derangement of the cranially mediated neurohormonal control of renal concentrating mechanism (central diabetes insipidus [DI]) or secondary to parenchymal kidney problems (nephrogenic DI) or by losses of free water from other sources. Also needed is the absence of an intact thirst mechanism. In hypernatremia, the hyperosmolar environment causes water to shift from the intracellular compartment to the extracellular compartment and causes overall brain cellular volume reduction. The major symptoms of hypernatremia are neurologic and include altered mental status, weakness, neuromuscular irritability, focal neurologic deficits, and occasionally coma or seizure. The severity of the symptoms depends on the amount of time it takes for the condition to develop. Acute hypernatremia is usually associated with more severe symptoms. These symptoms may include anorexia, restlessness, nausea and vomiting, altered mental status, lethargy or irritability, twitching, ataxia, hyperreflexia, stupor, and/or coma. Hypernatremia that develops over a long period (chronic hypernatremia) gives the adaptive mechanisms (uptake of myoinositol) of the brain a chance to adjust and typically is better tolerated and less symptomatic. Patients are likely to complain of thirst and often have signs of volume depletion. DI results in a decrease of arginine vasopressin (AVP) or a decrease in its action on the end organ. DI usually results in the production of abnormally large volumes of dilute urine (>50 ml/kg body weight) with a low osmolality (<300 mmol/kg). Primary DI can be classified into central, nephrogenic, and gestational types. Signs and symptoms are variable depending on the degree and severity of disease. Polyuria, enuresis, and/or nocturia are characteristic. Patients who have intact thirst mechanisms will also be polydipsic. Signs of dehydration and hypernatremia do not develop unless fluid intake becomes restricted. Secondary causes of DI generally develop in patients in whom AVP secretion is inhibited as a response to excessive fluid intake. DI can be classified as central DI (neurohypophyseal DI, neurogenic DI, or pituitary DI), which is caused by a deficient secretion of AVP, which may be congenital, genetic, or acquired. The genetic form is often transmitted by autosomal-dominant transmission but less commonly is transmitted as an X-linked recessive pattern. The common mutation is in the coding region of the AVP-neurophysin II gene that causes an accumulation of the mutant precursor and eventually results in the destruction of the neuron. The acquired form may be the consequence of neurohypophyseal destruction by disease or toxins. Nephrogenic DI can also be classified into genetic, acquired, or congenital. Patients often have normal or increased secretion of AVP, but the kidneys are unresponsive to the secretions. The genetic form is commonly transmitted by an X-linked recessive mutation in the coding region of the V2 receptor gene. Infection, toxins, and other hereditary kidney diseases can disrupt concentrating ability to a point where the AVP becomes ineffective in the acquired form. As opposed to patients with central DI, these patients often present as male infants who cannot express thirst to the caregivers. Treatment of uncomplicated central DI comprises replacement of AVP with the synthetic analog DDAVP by either IV or SC route, nasal inhalation, or oral tablet for symptomatic relief. Decrease in urine flow is dose dependent and may vary based on the severity of symptoms. Chlorpropamide can treat patients with central DI who have excessive thirst. Hypoglycemia as a complication may result from decreased caloric intake or exercise. (Chlorpropamide is contraindicated in pregnancy because of uncertain teratogenicity.) Nephrogenic DI cannot be effectively treated with DDAVP as a result of end-organ insensitivity. Thiazide diuretics with amiloride and a low-sodium diet are recommended to reduce the symptoms. Indomethacin can also be effective in some patients. B. Severe dehydration and hypernatremia may ensue as a result of increased secretion of urine without adequate replacement. Early intervention is often necessary to prevent complications such as convulsions and mental retardation. Gestational DI is often transient but may be severe until weeks after the delivery. The deficiency of AVP during pregnancy largely results from the increased production of an N-terminal aminopeptidase produced by the placenta that metabolizes AVP. These patients often have subclinical deficiency of AVP secretion in the nonpregnant state. The diagnosis of DI relies on documenting an increased 24-hour urine output (>3500 ml/kg in a 70-kg man) and a low urine osmolality (<300 mOsm/kg) with persistent thirst. A key aspect of the workup includes a fluid deprivation test, which is often necessary to determine the type of DI. (A positive test characterizes an increase in the urine osmolality >300 mOsm/kg. Nephrogenic DI can be diagnosed by administration of desmopressin [DDAVP] with an increase in the urine osmolality >300 mOsm/kg.) MRI may be useful in visualizing the pituitary and hypothalamus to demonstrate abnormalities. C. The treatment goals for hypernatremia are to stop ongoing water loss by treating the underlying cause and to correct the water deficit. Water replacement is essential in a patient who is hypovolemic. The amount of fluid deficit can be calculated by the equation: water deficit = ([plasma Na+] - 140)/140 × total body water Alternatively, the following formula can be used: water deficit = [(plasma Na+/140) – 1 ] × total body water where total body water in a patient with hypernatremia caused by water loss is approximately 50% in men and 40% in women. Water deficit should be corrected over 48-72 hours depending on severity and presentation. When calculating the rate of water replacement, ongoing losses should be taken into account, and the plasma Na+ concentration should be reduced by 0.5 mmol/L per hour and by no more than 12 mmol/L over the first 24 hours. The fluid should be replaced by an oral route if possible, but if the patient is unconscious, has an altered mental status, or is vomiting, the IV route is preferred with 5% dextrose in water or 0.45% saline solution.

