A. Appropriate and standard measurement of blood pressure (BP) is imperative to accurately diagnose, manage, and treat hypertension. Caffeine, exercise, and smoking should be avoided for at least 30 minutes prior to measurement and patients should be seated with the arm being measured at heart level. Indications for ambulatory BP monitoring include suspected “white coat” hypertension, hypotensive symptoms on therapy, episodic hypertension, and autonomic dysfunction.
B. Newer clinical guidelines for the management of hypertension stress the importance of treating all patients with hypertension (systolic BP [SBP] >140 mm Hg or diastolic BP [DBP] >90 mm Hg), rather than risk stratifying based on cardiovascular risk factors to determine who to treat. This is seen by the new designation of "prehypertension,” which comprises those patients at high risk for the development of hypertension. In addition, those who present with markedly elevated BP (>180/120 mm Hg) must be assessed for end-organ damage to rule out hypertensive crisis (urgency or emergency) (see Table 2).
C. The initial evaluation of a patient with hypertension includes history, physical examination, laboratory tests (urinalysis [UA], glucose, chemistry, fasting lipids), and ECG. This allows for screening of identifiable causes of hypertension (e.g., hypokalemia → mineralocorticoid excess; elevated creatinine → kidney disease; striae → cushingoid state; age <30 and/or femoral bruit → renovascular disease; etc.).
D. The use of lifestyle modifications is a requisite component of hypertension management. Weight loss, physical activity, moderation of alcohol consumption, and the adoption of a low-salt diet can lower BP up to 20 mm Hg.
E. A large body of evidence from randomized controlled trials now supports the use of specific classes of antihypertensive medications based on underlying comorbid states (or compelling indications). Initial pharmacologic therapy should be guided based on such an indication (Table 1). When one is not present, a thiazide diuretic or angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor (if risk for coronary artery disease is high) should be first-line therapy. If the target BP is not achieved, a different class of antihypertensive medication should be added rather than substituted because recent data indicate that most people will require multiple agents to achieve their target BP. As a result, two-drug combinations are reasonable first choices in those with stage 2 hypertension. In the event of a hypertensive crisis, the medications in Table 2 are indicated.

