The prevalence of diabetes mellitus is increasing exponentially in the United States and around the globe. The disease currently affects approximately 18 million Americans. Type 2 diabetes accounts for approximately 95% of all cases and is characterized by insulin resistance and hyperglycemia. Hyperinsulinemia occurs early in the disease but is not maintained indefinitely. Many patients ultimately require insulin to maintain glucose levels in the normal range. Because almost 90% of all patients with diabetes will die from cardiovascular complications, cardiovascular risk reduction is the primary target.

A. Diabetes is diagnosed if there are symptoms of diabetes (polyuria, polydipsia, unexplained weight loss) and a random glucose level of >200 mg/dl. A fasting glucose of >126 mg/dl or a glucose of >200 mg/dl 2 hours after a 75-g glucose load are also diagnostic. Diagnostic use of the hemoglobin Alc (HbAlc) is not recommended.
B. Hyperglycemia not sufficient to meet the diagnostic criteria for diabetes (prediabetes) is categorized as either impaired fasting glucose or impaired glucose tolerance. Diabetes can be prevented in patients with either of these conditions if patients lose weight and embark on an exercise program. Metformin can also be used to prevent the onset of diabetes in these patients at high risk.
C. Secondary causes of diabetes should be considered when evaluating any patient with diabetes. Drugs that cause diabetes such as glucocorticoids, thiazides, Dlantin, and protease inhibitors should have their doses reduced or replaced with alternative agents if possible. Genetic causes of diabetes should be excluded if a strong family history of diabetes or a phenotype (e.g., Down, Turner's, Klinefelter's syndromes) is noted. Endocrinopathies such as Cushing's syndrome, acromegaly, pheochromocytoma, hyperthyroidism, and others should be sought from the history and examination. Patients with diseases that affect the exocrine pancreas, such as hemochromatosis, chronic pancreatitis, pancreatic, malignancy, or cystic fibrosis, are at high risk for diabetes; treatment of the underlying disease is often critical to reduce the rate of progression to insulin deficiency and to managing the diabetes.
D. Patients with type 1 diabetes require lifelong insulin treatment. Typically basal insulin is used with ultra-short-acting insulins given before each meal or snack. Patients with type 1 diabetes should be taught to count carbohydrates and to calculate both correction and prandial insulin dosing. These patients should work with a diabetes team and be offered insulin-pump therapy. Blood pressure; lipid; and renal, eye, and foot care guidelines are similar to those for patients with type 2 diabetes.
E. Patients who are newly diagnosed with type 2 diabetes should be provided with a glucometer and testing instructions and referred for diabetes education and medical nutrition therapy. Smoking cessation and the benefits of exercise and weight loss should be emphasized.
F. For patients requiring treatment, metformin remains the first-line agent of choice. Patients should be warned that early GI side effects are not uncommon and should be tolerated if possible; they usually abate within 2 weeks. Metformin use is associated with cardiovascular risk reduction but cannot be used in patients with creatinine levels >1.5 mg or in those who have severe chronic illnesses. Sulfonylureas are added as second-line agents because they are cost-effective. Short-acting sulfonylureas such as glipizide are preferred for their shorter half-life, especially among older patients. Thiazolidinediones such as pioglitazone are used as third-line therapy or among patients with contraindications to first- and second-line drugs; however, they have more limited efficacy and have been associated with cardiovascular risk and bone loss.
Gliptins have limited efficacy but are weight neutral and well tolerated. Exenatide has a high incidence of GI side effects and limited efficacy but can result in weight loss.
G. A typical starting dose of insulin is 0.3 U/kg. Insulin management should include a basal insulin (insulin glargine or neutral protamine Hagedorn [NPH]) with shorter-acting insulins added before meals in an incremental fashion. Doses are titrated to premeal and postprandial glucoses. Patients in need of insulin treatment should be warned to check their glucose before driving. Current approaches to glycemic management include the use of glucagon-like-peptide (GLP)-1 analogs, inhibitors of dipeptidyl-peptidase-4, and amylin analogs.
H. Blood pressure control is just as important as glycemic control. Treatment with an angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor is typically used as a first line, with calcium channel blockers and thiazide diuretics added as necessary. Most patients require two to four antihypertensive agents to achieve a recommended blood pressure of <130/80 mm Hg.
I. Urinary microalbumin levels should be assessed yearly. The presence of >30 mg of microalbumin per gram of creatinine is a risk factor for nephropathy and cardiovascular disease. ACE inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) should be titrated until the microalbumin level is suppressed below 30 mg/g creatinine.
J. Hyperlipidemia in diabetes typically features hypertriglyceridemia and low levels of high-density lipoprotein (HDL). The latter can be treated with fibrates or niacin. Levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) >100 mg/dl are associated with increased cardiovascular risk. Statins should be offered to such patients.
K. Gestational diabetes refers to any diabetes that is diagnosed during pregnancy. Screening is optimally performed at 24-28 weeks of gestation or earlier in women at high risk (positive family history, obesity, prior macrosomia). Diagnosis is suggested by a fasting glucose >126 mg/dl, a random glucose >200 mg/dl, or a glucose >140 mg/dl 1 hour after a 50-g glucose load. Diagnosis during pregnancy is confirmed using a 3-hour oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) using a 100-g glucose load. Criteria for a positive 3-hour glucose tolerance test include a fasting glucose >95 mg/dl, a 1-hour sample >180 mg/dl, a 2-hour sample >155 mg/dl, or a 3-hour sample >140 mg/dl. Patients with gestational diabetes should be provided with nutritional counseling and a glucometer. Fasting glucose readings should be kept at <90 mg/dl, and 1-hour postprandial levels should be <120 mg/dl. A minority of women with gestational diabetes will require insulin therapy; usually insulin NPH and ultra-short-acting insulins (lispro or aspart) are used. Oral agents are not routinely used to manage gestational diabetes. Sulfonylureas are contraindicated in pregnancy, and safety data for metformin use are very limited.
L. Hyperglycemia during hospitalization is associated with significant increases in morbidity and mortality. Normalization of glucose has been shown to be beneficial among patients in medical and surgical intensive care units. In intensive care unit settings, insulin should be infused intravenously if glucose is >120 mg/dl and titrated thereafter to a glucose level of <140 mg/dl. The patient can be transitioned to SC insulin when stable (e.g., extubated, off pressors) whether or not the patient is eating. If glucose control has been on target, many clinicians start with an insulin dose that is 80% of the previous day's total daily insulin use. Prescriptions should be written for basal, prandial, and correction doses.

