Hypocalcemia is a consequence of excess calcium loss (into tissue, urine, or bone) or binding, or a problem with a calcium source (GI or bone). Parathyroid hormone (PTH) works to maintain calcium levels by releasing calcium from bone and activates vitamin D to facilitate the absorption of calcium from the gut.

A. Calcium is necessary for normal neuromuscle activity, and hypocalcemia can be associated with paresthesias and carpopedal spasm. Latent tetany can be elucidated by tapping on the facial nerve (Chvostek's sign) or leaving a sphygmomanometer inflated to above the systolic pressure for 5 minutes on the arm and observing for hand and arm spasm (Trousseau's sign). The examination should look for signs of chronic hypocalcemia such as hypertension, dystonia, ataxia, dementia, malnutrition, dry skin, dermatitis, sparse and brittle hair, cataracts, and papilledema. With severe hypocalcemia, the ECG becomes abnormal, most typically with a prolonged QT interval.
B. Hypoalbuminemia is associated with lower serum calcium concentrations but normal ionized calcium levels. Simple correction formulas adjusting for the serum albumin (e.g., corrected calcium = serum calcium (mg/dl) + 0.8[4-serum albumin (g/dl)]) generally suffice in estimating ionized calcium if a direct measurement is not readily available. When possible, ionized calcium, phosphate, and 25-vitamin D levels should be measured.
C. In patients who are critically ill, the differential diagnosis of hypocalcemia narrows. Acute hyperphosphatemia (caused by acute renal failure, rhabdomyolysis, or tumor lysis, for example) causes acute hypocalcemia directly. Pancreatitis that is sufficiently severe to cause hypocalcemia (by forming soaps in the pancreatic bed) is usually obvious. Acute respiratory alkalosis, which increases calcium binding to albumin in the blood, reduces ionized calcium levels. Magnesium is critical for the efflux of PTH, and hypomagnesemia induces both a deficiency of and resistance to the effect of PTH. Hypomagnesemia is most commonly found in patients with a history of heavy alcohol abuse or malabsorption or in those receiving parenteral nutrition. Administer IV calcium to patients who are symptomatic and treat the underlying disease.
D. Renal disease is associated with hyperphosphatemia due to impaired glomerular filtration and reduced 1-alpha hydroxylase activity, which result in chronic hypocalcemia. This chronic hypocalcemia typically results in secondary or tertiary hyperparathyroidism, so PTH levels are high.
E. Persistent hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia is, in the absence of renal failure or increased tissue breakdown, virtually diagnostic of either postsurgical or idiopathic hypoparathyroidism. The PTH level in these patients is low. Idiopathic hypoparathyroidism is a rare condition that may be isolated or associated with familial polyglandular endocrinopathy type 2 (mucocutaneous candidiasis, Addison's disease, or hypoparathyroidism). It usually presents in childhood. Other rare causes of hypoparathyroidism include DiGeorge syndrome, Wilson's disease, and hemochromatosis. Head and neck surgery, primarily for thyroid or parathyroid diseases, and rarely radiation therapy, can result in transient or sometimes permanent PTH deficiency that may not develop immediately. Pseudohypoparathyroidism should be considered in patients with the appropriate phenotype (such as short metacarpals) and signs of resistance to other glycoprotein hormones.
F. Hypocalcemia associated with low phosphate and low 25-vitamin D usually indicates an absorptive problem. Differential diagnoses that should be considered include malabsorption states (sprue, short bowel, regional enteritis), hepatobiliary disease, anticonvulsant therapy, and vitamin D deficiency or resistance states. Bisphosphonates can induce hypocalcemia if vitamin D stores are low.
G. Treatment includes adequate replacement of calcium, magnesium, and vitamin D. In conditions in which conversion of vitamin D to 1,25-vitamin D is perturbed (i.e., renal disease, vitamin D-resistant rickets), replacement with calcitriol or a similar metabolite is necessary. Vitamin D deficiency syndromes can be treated with high-dose vitamin D (such as 50,000 U given orally once every 2 weeks).

