Joint hypermobility is a spectrum of disorders ranging from the benign to the severe. This chapter will discuss briefly the range of phenotypes and point out the medically serious complications that can arise in the more severe phenotypes. Joint hypermobility is generally quantified by a scoring system, the Beighton score. One point is accorded for each of the following: extensibility of the elbow joint >10 degrees, extensibility of the knee joint >10 degrees, the ability to extend the fifth metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joint to 90 degrees, and the ability to oppose the thumb to the forearm. All of these generate 1 point each; if bilateral, they generate 2 points each. The last point (of a total of 9 possible points) is for the ability to place the palms on the floor with the knees straight (1 point). Approximately 12%-20% of a rheumatology population has a Beighton score of 5–9. Far fewer have a score ranging from 7–9.
A. A syndrome accompanies joint hypermobility, characterized in some patients by vague muscle aches, intermittent joint swellings without frank trauma or dislocation, and a typical fibromyalgia syndrome. Many patients have mitral valve prolapse (MVP) and associated palpitations. Many patients without a frank syndrome suffer from recurrent joint dislocations and in childhood have had frequent visits to orthopedists. Neonatologists and pediatricians encounter the severe genetic abnormalities causing joint hypermobility; the complete description of these is beyond the scope of this text. Two phenotypic syndromes—Marfan's syndrome and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome—may present with joint hypermobility and bear more extensive discussion here. Both of these syndromes may have medical emergencies requiring urgent management.
B. Marfan's syndrome is characterized by elongated body habitus, ectopia lentis (an upward displacement is characteristic), scoliosis, pes planus, high arched palate, dural ectasia (especially of the lumbosacral spine), and lung blebs. Vascular complications may be severe and include aortic dissection and dilation (usually DeBakey type I) and mitral valve prolapse and regurgitations. The scoliosis can be severe and cause chronic pain. The eye problems also can include retinal detachment. Adults (and probably children) should receive long-term prophylactic beta blockade to try to prevent aortic dilation and dissection. Counseling regarding the importance of low-impact physical activity is important, and ongoing aortic echocardiography is warranted. Particular problems may arise during pregnancy, and female patients wishing to conceive need to be counseled both on the genetic inheritance of Marfan's syndrome and the increased risk to the mother.
C. Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is a diverse grouping of abnormal collagen coding and transcription. An older classification (still used by many) defines up to 11 types. Many of these present very early after birth. Of importance in the differential diagnosis in adults is “type III,” which can look like the hyperextensible joint syndrome. Unfortunately, there is no way currently to absolutely distinguish Ehlers-Danlos type III from mere hyperextensible joint syndrome. The distinction can become important because patients with type III Ehlers-Danlos syndrome may have severe mitral valve prolapse and mitral regurgitation. Patients with type IV Ehlers-Danlos syndrome have some joint hypermobility, but they are less hypermobile that the patients with type III. This phenotype is important to recognize because they can have spontaneous rupture of the colon, uterus (especially in pregnancy), and vascular tree. Other types of Ehlers-Danlos (especially I and II) have very thin skin that tends to scar like thin cigarette paper, especially over the elbows and knees. The skin is hyperdistensible and often nearly translucent. Hypermobility in these types is usually moderate.