A. The cause of a leg ulcer usually can be determined by history and physical examination alone. It is therefore important to ask the patient about trauma and any history of diseases such as coronary artery disease, deep venous thrombosis, and diabetes mellitus. Inquire about symptoms of vasculitis, chronic inflammatory disorders, and neoplasms. The physical examination should focus on evidence of edema, varicosities, arterial insufficiency, neuropathy, and infection.
B. Arterial ulcers account for 5% of all leg ulcers. They result from impairment of blood flow and have multiple causes, including emboli, thrombi, arteriosclerosis, Buerger's disease, hypertension, vasospasm, vasculitis, and hematologic disorders. Patients complain of pain at rest that is exacerbated with leg elevation and relieved with dependency. The ulcers are characterized by a pale or eschar-covered base with minimal granulation tissue, usually occurring on the distal foot. Other important signs of arterial involvement are coolness of the extremities, decreased pulses and slow capillary refill, a palpable or audible bruit over the femoral artery, and decreased hair on the distal legs. If arterial pulses are not palpable, use a Doppler flowmeter to hear the pulsations over the dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial arteries and calculate the ankle/brachial index (ABI) of systolic pressure. If the index is <0.7, moderate to severe disease is present and arteriography should be considered.
C. Chronic venous insufficiency accounts for about 90% of all leg ulcers. Venous stasis results from a dysfunction of venous outflow, most commonly caused by defective valves (usually secondary to deep venous thromboses or a congenital defect). Patients have edema and, in contrast to those with arterial disease, have relatively little pain. On physical examination an ulcer with exudate and granulation tissue often is seen over the medial malleolus. Varicosities, brown hemosiderin pigment, and stasis dermatitis support the diagnosis.
D. In the presence of normal vasculature and no obvious etiology, consider pyoderma gangrenosum (PG, which has a violaceous border that is undermined), inflammatory bowel disease, hematologic malignancies, or other systemic disease.
E. Neurotrophic ulcers are caused by the repeated trauma or pressure on weight-bearing areas where there is impaired cutaneous sensation. Diabetes mellitus accounts for most of these ulcers, but other causes include other forms of vascular disease (polyarteritis nodosa), lead/arsenic polyneuropathies, alcoholic polyneuropathy, sarcoidosis, leprosy, and syphilis.
F. Infection is another etiologic factor in leg ulcers. It occurs most commonly after primary inoculation of a pathogen, although dissemination from a primary focus elsewhere also is possible. Lesions are inflamed and purulent and may have draining sinuses. Perform a biopsy at the ulcer margin and send the tissue to be cultured for bacterial, fungal, mycobacterial, and viral pathogens, as well as for routine histology.
G. Lack of response of an ulcer to therapy or rapid growth of a lesion that was previously stable should lead one to suspect neoplasm. An elevated ulcer edge with central crust or granulation tissue is characteristic of many tumors. A biopsy of the ulcer margin should be performed.
H. Traumatic ulcers are diagnosed by history. Some patients with self-induced disease may be unwilling to divulge the cause and may, in fact, be inappropriately unconcerned. These ulcers are characterized by bizarre shapes that have minimal surrounding erythema.

