In adults leukopenia is a total WBC count <3700 cells/mm³. Most cases result from absolute neutropenia (<2500 cells/mm³); rare cases are secondary to absolute lymphopenia (<1000 cells/mm³).

A. Initial evaluation should include a thorough history and physical examination. Give special attention to the use of drugs and the presence of adenopathy, splenomegaly, ecchymoses, petechiae, and signs of infection. CBC, differential, and platelet counts are essential to determine absolute neutrophil and lymphocyte counts and to rule out any accompanying anemia or thrombocytopenia. The blood smear provides important information concerning RBC and WBC morphology. The results of these tests often lead to specific diagnoses.
B. Patients with neutropenia usually have signs and symptoms of infection that often are life threatening. Fever in the absence of localizing signs of infection is common. After obtaining cultures, start broad-spectrum antibiotics immediately.
C. Isolated neutropenia and pancytopenia can occur with many commonly used noncytotoxic drugs (e.g., quinidine, penicillins, sulfonamides, phenothiazines, diuretics), alkylating agents, antimetabolites, and other neoplastic agents. If physical examination and laboratory test results are negative for a neoplastic or hematologic disorder, stop the drug and observe the patient by taking frequent blood counts. Order a bone marrow biopsy and aspirate if the neutropenia fails to resolve in 5–7 days or if blood counts continue to decline.
D. Disorders leading to splenomegaly with splenic sequestration can cause neutropenia, but there usually is associated thrombocytopenia. Differential diagnosis includes cirrhosis, sarcoidosis, glycogen storage diseases, and other uncommon conditions.
E. If the bone marrow result is unremarkable and there is no evidence of splenomegaly or an autoimmune disorder, consider rare chronic neutropenic states. Observe the patient with serial blood counts to document the neutropenic pattern.
F. Most cases of neutropenia are associated with anemia and/or thrombocytopenia. Unless a drug is strongly suspected as the cause, order a bone marrow biopsy and aspirate to rule out a primary hematologic disorder that requires prompt treatment.
G. If the only bone marrow abnormality is the absence of mature granulocytes, this suggests maturation arrest or autoimmune destruction. Perform a workup for an autoimmune disorder. If available, an antineutrophil antibody assay may be helpful.
H. Infections that can cause neutropenia with anemia and/or thrombocytopenia include viruses (Epstein-Barr, cytomegalovirus, virus HIV, hepatitis, measles); bacteria (severe gram-negative and gram-positive organisms); Mycobacterium, typhoid fever, malaria; and fungi. Bone marrow should be cultured as part of an extensive workup for infection.
I. Lymphopenia without associated neutropenia is uncommon. Most cases are secondary to drugs (e.g., steroids), radiation injury, or renal failure. Some viral infections, particularly HIV, can also cause absolute lymphopenia.

