More than 500 lymph nodes in the human body may become enlarged in response to numerous stimuli: (1) infection (bacterial, viral, parasitic, spirochetal, chlamydial, mycobacterial, or fungal), (2) drug reactions (phenytoin, serum sickness), (3) malignancy (head and neck, GI, breast, rectal, lymphoma), and (4) miscellaneous conditions (sarcoidosis, systemic lupus erythematosus).
A. New-onset lymphadenopathy <7 days' duration is unlikely to be malignant.
B. Recurrent or long-term (>7–14 days) lymphadenopathy (unilateral or bilateral) requires a full workup. Most experienced clinicians see the patient again in 2-4 weeks to determine whether the node is increasing before embarking on a full workup. The associated symptoms of fever, weight loss, or night sweats suggest malignancy (lymphoma B symptoms) or infection. Regional symptoms such as chest tightness, dysphagia, shortness of breath, and/or facial swelling suggest mediastinal disease and require a CT scan of the chest. Complaints of fullness in the abdomen, early satiety, and pain radiating to the shoulders or back necessitate abdominal CT to rule out pancreatic, renal, or other intraperitoneal lesions. Unilateral leg swelling (after deep vein thrombosis is ruled out) may require pelvic CT to rule out regional lymphadenopathy causing extrinsic compression.
C. Serologic studies and blood cultures help differentiate among infections, collagen vascular disease, and malignancy. Among the most common infectious causes are infectious mononucleosis, toxoplasmosis, syphilis, Epstein-Barr virus, HIV, and cytomegalovirus. If the history is suspicious and the patient is or was living in an endemic area, these causes must be ruled out.
D. Lymph node enlargement in the head and neck area requires a careful ear, neck, and throat (ENT) evaluation, including biopsy of suspicious lesions; if ENT findings are normal, the patient may need to undergo a triple endoscopy procedure with evaluation of nasal, bronchial, and esophageal passages. Consider fine needle biopsy of the lymph node only if endoscopic findings are normal.
E. The supraclavicular area often is affected by breast cancer, lymphomas (Hodgkin's and non-Hodgkin's), and metastases from the lung and GI tract (esophagus, stomach, pancreas). Supraclavicular nodes are easily biopsied and are highly diagnostic.
F. Enlarged axillary lymph nodes often are a sign of breast or lung cancer. They also are often affected by lymphoma and may be biopsied to obtain a diagnosis if the primary source cannot be found.
G. When inguinal nodes are enlarged, physical examination should focus on the anorectal region, perineum, vulva, penis, and scrotum. Perform sigmoidoscopy to rule out rectal or anal carcinoma; evaluate the genitourinary system by urinalysis. Pelvic CT may provide useful information. If CT findings are normal, proceed with biopsy. Tumor markers carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), prostate-specific antigen (PSA), and the murine monoclonal antibody OC125 also may provide guidance toward a diagnosis.
H. For a patient with generalized lymphadenopathy but no other signs or symptoms and no other organ involvement, consider biopsy of the most accessible region (not necessarily the largest). The diagnostic yield is better with supraclavicular, axillary, or inguinal nodes (in descending order). The key feature of these biopsies is the need for adequate amounts of tissue with the specimen sectioned to allow for light microscopy, fresh frozen tissue for markers, and a portion in glutaraldehyde for electron microscopy. Patients with nondiagnostic biopsies require close follow-up, especially those with atypical hyperplasia, because many may develop lymphoproliferative disorders. Also, consider angioimmunoblastic lymphadenopathy in patients with “hyperplasia.” This can be done by an experienced immunopathologist. Newer technology, such as positron emission tomography (PET) scans, could be considered as a means of identifying the most appropriate node to biopsy. To assist in the selection of which node to biopsy, one can choose the node that is most active metabolically. This likely would have a better chance of identifying the appropriate node than by random selection, especially in cases in which no known diagnosis is present, other attempts have failed, or review of the literature failed to provide any supporting studies.

