Memory loss, once thought to be a common accompaniment of aging, is now known to be caused by a variety of pathologic insults, many of which are more prevalent in older age. The challenges for clinicians are to take memory complaints by individuals of any age seriously; take a detailed history from the patient and a family member or friend who knows the patient well; generate a differential diagnosis based on the patient's history and risk factors; and pursue the relevant workup, monitoring, and treatment. It is also important to recognize that although a family member or friend may bring memory loss to the attention of the clinician, the patient may deny a problem. Lack of insight into memory impairment is a common occurrence and should be taken very seriously by the clinician.

A. Patients and families may complain of memory loss when in fact impairments in attention, language, or visuospatial function are the source of the problem. A careful, structured history focused on daily activities can often better delineate the problem. Were there particular incidents that prompted the evaluation? Does the patient have difficulty keeping track of appointments, plans, or schedules, or ask questions repeatedly? This may be a symptom of anterograde memory impairment—difficulty learning and retaining new information. Is the patient unable to remember details of recent events, either in personal/family life (e.g., a holiday gathering) or in the news? Such symptoms may indicate a retrograde memory impairment—difficulty retrieving previously learned information. Complaints that “I walk into another room and forget why I was going there” and the like may indicate problems with attention or concentration. Difficulties retrieving the names of friends, family members, or celebrities, or words in conversation may indicate language dysfunction. Incidents in which the patient became lost while driving or disoriented while walking suggest visuospatial dysfunction or problems with spatial memory. Concerns surrounding judgment, decision making, ability to follow the steps of a process, or multitasking may indicate executive dysfunction. In addition to delineating symptom details, a discussion about the impact of symptoms on routine daily life is essential. Has the patient given up activities that were previously performed? Does the patient make mistakes, require additional assistance, or take longer to perform tasks because of memory or cognitive difficulties? In an older person, the presence of cognitive complaints in the setting of impaired routine activities is the hallmark of dementia (see the section Chronic Behavior Change). A detailed history taken from the patient and a reliable informant and emphasis on these areas will usually reveal the nature of the symptoms and suggest how to tailor the approach to examination and testing.
B. Once the history has illuminated the specificity of symptoms, the office examination can be focused on determining the presence and severity of signs. Behavioral observation of the patient with amnesia during the interview will often reveal a normal-appearing (awake, alert, interactive) person who is able to carry on a seemingly routine conversation, although careful attention by the clinician will often detect a relatively limited repertoire of vague statements lacking substantive detail. The clinician should note the patient's awareness of cognitive difficulties and reactions to test performance. Denial of symptoms/signs (anosognosia) can be striking to observe, and usually indicates significant impairment of memory and possibly other cognitive systems. The purpose of a focused mental status examination in the office is to pursue clinical hypotheses generated by the history (see the References for resources describing the mental status examination). Are attention, language, and visuospatial function in fact relatively preserved? What type of memory loss is present? There are multiple memory systems of the brain, and they can be subdivided a number of ways. One useful heuristic is to consider episodic, semantic, procedural, and working memory. Episodic memory involves the ability to learn and retrieve “episodes of life.” It is subserved by the medial temporal lobe (including the hippocampus) and other components of the limbic system (including the basal forebrain and mammillothalamic tract), as well as the prefrontal cortex. Episodic memory dysfunction usually adheres to Ribot's law, which states that recently learned information is more likely to be lost than remotely learned information. In patients with episodic memory loss, there are typically impairments in the learning of new information (which can be tested with word or picture lists in the office) and the retrieval of recently learned information (testable by asking about details of recent experiences in the (Continued on page 422)