A. A complete history and physical examination are crucial and are the most useful tools for making the correct diagnosis. Joint pain may result from abnormalities in the joint itself, in adjacent bone, or from surrounding ligaments, tendons, bursae, or soft tissues. Pain may also be referred from a neuropathic condition or pathology in another joint. Monarthritis of acute onset (hours to days) usually indicates trauma, infection, or a crystal-induced process. Rarely, it may represent an atypical presentation of a systemic inflammatory condition. Careful questioning may reveal prior joint symptoms, stiffness, or systemic symptoms such as fatigue. Monarthritis persisting >4–6 weeks may indicate a chronic condition such as atypical infection, osteoarthritis, tumor, or systemic inflammatory disease.
B. Aspiration of the affected joint for synovial fluid analysis is always indicated to evaluate monarthritis. Synovial fluid should be sent for WBC count with differential, Gram stain, culture, and crystal analysis. Additional tests do not generally improve diagnostic sensitivity. Synovial fluid WBC count is the single most important measurement to separate noninflammatory from inflammatory processes. With appropriate clinical correlation, a WBC count <2000 cells/mm³ represents a non-inflammatory process, whereas higher WBC counts represent inflammatory conditions. Polymorphonuclear leukocyte-predominant effusions (>75% cell count) also indicate an acute inflammatory process.
C. Acute bacterial arthritis is a medical emergency, and rapid treatment is warranted to prevent irreversible cartilage and bone destruction. Acute bacterial arthritis may be divided into nongonococcal and gonococcal causes. Gram-positive organisms, particularly Staphylococcus aureus, are the most common agents to cause nongonococcal bacterial arthritis. Nongonococcal infection is often associated with a primary focus of infection elsewhere. Therefore, an unexplained arthritis in the setting of bacteremia, pneumonia, or other infection should be presumed to represent septic arthritis. Disseminated gonococcal infection (DGI) may present as a painful monarthritis, polyarthritis (usually migratory [i.e., as one joint is improving, another is becoming inflamed]), or tenosynovitis. Subtle skin lesions, including macules, pustules, and vesicles, may also be present. Because synovial fluid cultures from patients with DGI are infrequently positive, evidence for infection should be sought from other sites (genitourinary, pharyngeal, rectal, skin lesions).
D. The diagnosis of gouty arthritis is established by the presence of intracellular needle-shaped, negatively birefringent crystals, whereas rhomboid-shaped, positively birefringent crystals indicate calcium pyrophosphate deposition disease (CPPD, also known as pseudogout). In patients <60 years of age, consider screening for associated disorders such as hemochromatosis, hyperparathyroidism, and hypothyroidism. Detection of calcium hydroxyapatite crystals is more difficult because it requires electron microscopy or Alizarin Red staining if clinically suspected. Although rare, identification of crystals does not negate the possibility of coexistent infection, so joint cultures should also be followed.
E. If analysis of synovial fluid does not reveal the diagnosis, radiographs of the affected joints and contralateral joints should be performed. Common findings include osteoarthritis and chondrocalcinosis (suggesting CPPD). Less often, unsuspected bony lesions such as fracture, malignancy, osteomyelitis, or Paget's disease may be detected. Repeat synovial fluid analysis should be done with additional cultures and smears for acid-fast bacteria and fungus. In endemic areas, a Lyme titer should be sent, especially if there is a history of rash, tick bite, or appropriate exposure. Rheumatoid factor (RF), anticyclic citrullinated antibody, and ANA may be sent to increase the sensitivity of detecting a systemic inflammatory disease such as an atypical presentation of rheumatoid arthritis or systemic lupus erythematosus.
F. If the diagnosis is still not clear, close observation is warranted. If symptoms remit, no further workup is necessary. Alternatively, additional axial or peripheral arthritic symptoms may develop to suggest evolution into a systemic inflammatory disease. If monarthritis persists for 4–6 weeks in the absence of a clear diagnosis, synovial biopsy should be considered to diagnose tuberculous or fungal infections, amyloid, pigmented villonodular synovitis, or other tumors.
G. Noninflammatory, nonbloody effusions should prompt joint radiography to examine for trauma, osteoarthritis, neuropathic arthritis, or avascular necrosis (AVN). Osteoarthritis may present with significant effusions with little inflammation compared to the degree of cartilage and bone destruction. Neuropathic arthropathy is most commonly associated with diabetes but may occur in a variety of neurologic diseases. Loss of pain and proprioceptive sensation allows joint movement to exceed normal range of motion, leading to significant joint instability. Ultimately, dislocation and deformity may occur. AVN is a common cause of shoulder, hip, or knee monarthritis in younger people requiring corticosteroids for systemic diseases. If a high suspicion for AVN exists and radiographs are negative, MRI is more sensitive for detecting early changes associated with AVN. Similarly, if there is a history of trauma with persistent clicking, locking, or "give way” symptoms, MRI may be indicated to better evaluate joint soft-tissue structures.
H. Hemarthrosis may result from trauma, anticoagulant therapy, inherited coagulopathies, pigmented villonodular synovitis, or synovial hemangiomas. True hemarthrosis must be distinguished from a traumatic tap. Effusions from hemarthrosis are uniformly bloody and do not spontaneously clot.
I. Persistent bloody effusions in the absence of trauma or coagulopathy suggest tumor, particularly pigmented villonodular synovitis. In such cases, synovial biopsy is warranted for further diagnosis.

