A. The patient presenting to the clinician with narrow-complex tachycardia should be immediately assessed for hemodynamic compromise and treated according to Advanced Cardiac Life Support (ACLS) guidelines. After stabilization, evaluation and therapy can ensue. Narrow-complex tachycardia is almost always a result of supraventricular tachycardias (SVTs), particularly if the QRS complex in tachycardia is identical to that in sinus rhythm.
B. The history and physical examination should be directed toward the search for underlying structural heart disease. Evidence of hemodynamic compromise during tachycardia, including syncope, presyncope, chest discomfort, or dyspnea, should be ascertained. Evaluation of the ECG in sinus rhythm should focus on the presence or absence of preexcitation. Echocardiography should be strongly considered in patients with narrow-complex tachycardia to assess the presence of underlying structural heart disease.
C. The presence of preexcitation warrants referral to an electrophysiologist for evaluation of the appropriateness of diagnostic electrophysiologic study (EPS) and possible catheter ablation in the setting of preexcitation and potential atrioventricular reciprocating tachycardia (AVRT). If preexcitation is not clearly manifest, significant symptoms, particularly syncope, also warrant evaluation by an electrophysiologist.
D. If the SVT is sustained and symptomatic, particularly if medical therapy has failed to suppress episodes, the patient should be referred to an electrophysiologist for possible EPS and catheter ablation. The differential diagnosis includes atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia (AVNRT), AVRT, atrial tachycardia, PJRT (so-called permanent junctional reciprocating tachycardia), and atrial flutter with regular ventricular response.
E. If atrial fibrillation, multifocal atrial tachycardia (MAT), or atrial flutter are diagnosed, medical therapy may be initiated. The goals of medical therapy include symptom relief, rate control during tachycardia, and consideration of anticoagulation. Failure of medical therapy to relieve symptoms or control ventricular rate warrants consideration of catheter ablation.