A. Although nipple discharge is more commonly associated with benign than malignant lesions, cancer needs to be ruled out as the cause. As an initial step a careful medical history and examination is of paramount importance. To be significant, any type of nipple discharge should be true, spontaneous, persistent, and nonlactational. Question the patient for any medication, recent pregnancy, and evidence of amenorrhea. Pharmaceuticals that can cause galactorrhea include estrogens, phenothiazines, opiates, tricyclic antidepressants, dopamine antagonists, and many others by different mechanisms.
There are seven basic types of nipple discharge. Milky, multicolored, and purulent secretions are treated medically except for an abscess concomitant with a purulent discharge that requires surgical drainage. The remaining four types are yellow or serous, pink or serosanguineous, bloody or sanguineous, and clear or watery. These four types can be the result of cancer and often require surgery to obtain tissue for histologic study.
B. It is important to differentiate between galactorrheal and nongalactorrheal discharge. Galactorrhea may occur bilaterally or unilaterally. Secretions may be thick or thin, or pure white or close to colorless, or they may have a grayish or greenish hue. Fat stain is highly sensitive for determining presence of milk. Galactorrhea usually is of hormonal or pharmacologic origin. Measure serum prolactin and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) in all patients with galactorrhea. If prolactin is elevated, obtain an MRI to determine whether the patient has a pituitary mass. If the prolactin and TSH are normal, follow the patient yearly or as indicated clinically. Human growth hormone (GH) binds to and activates prolactin receptors and GH receptors. Thus, galactorrhea may be an early sign of acromegaly. If clinically warranted, obtain a GH measurement. If the TSH is high, evaluate the patient for hypothyroidism. Patients with galactorrhea caused by hypothyroidism may have normal, high normal, or moderately elevated concentrations of prolactin. The majority of women with galactorrhea do not have an underlying, pathologic cause. At least half of women who have ever lactated can have galactorrhea at some time in their lives. Moreover, women who manipulate their breasts, or whose partners do so, can also experience galactorrhea. When galactorrhea is bilateral, a neoplastic process is particularly unlikely. Therefore, galactorrhea rarely requires treatment, unless an underlying cause is identified.
C. In patients with nongalactorrheal discharge, first perform a careful and thorough breast examination. Palpation of a mass requires immediate and complete evaluation to rule out a malignant process. If no mass is palpable, consider cytology and mammography. Although a mass usually is present when the discharge is caused by cancer, there is no palpable mass in 13% of cancers with nipple secretions. Do not rely solely on the cytology of the discharge. There is a reported 18% false-negative rate and 2.6% false-positive rate with standard cytology alone. Mammography has a 9.5% false-negative rate and 1.6% false-positive rate for detecting cancer in patients with a nipple discharge. The ability of soft-tissue mammography to identify and localize intraductal papillomas is limited. A number of authors have suggested that galactography (a contrast mammogram obtained by injecting a radiopaque dye into the discharging duct) is the diagnostic procedure of choice for nipple discharge. It is better than soft-tissue mammography in its ability to visualize and localize small intraductal papillomas. However, its ability to differentiate benign from malignant lesions is limited, and it is a time-consuming procedure that can be uncomfortable to the patients. Because diagnostic tests are not 100% accurate, surgically significant discharges should be evaluated with biopsy and histologic tissue examinations. Although rare, a watery discharge must be considered with concern. There is an increasing likelihood of cancer when the discharge is (in order of increasing frequency) serous, serosanguineous, sanguineous, or watery; when it is accompanied by a lump; when there are adverse cytologic and mammographic findings; and when the patient is >50 years of age.

