A. Obesity is epidemic throughout the world. Current estimates in the United States are that 32.2% of adults are obese, and that number has been steadily increasing since the 1980s. Obesity is prevalent in Western Europe and Asia and much of the Third World. In England, it is estimated that 23% of men and women over 50 years of age are obese; in Pakistan 13% of men and 8% of women are obese.
The etiology of obesity is part of the initial evaluation of the patient. A dietary and caloric expenditure history is important. So too is family history and exploration of socioeconomic factors and medications. Many medications cause weight gain (including many anti-psychotic and antidepressant medications, insulin, sulfonylureas, anticonvulsants, beta blockers, and cyproheptadine). Endocrine causes are rare and include Cushing's disease, hypothyroidism, or hypothalamic disorders. Routine testing for endocrine causes is not recommended unless the history, physical examination, and distribution of adipose tissue support the endocrine diagnosis.
Obesity may be multifactorial, but the major cause in both Western and non-Western society is diet. Many patients prefer to believe that their obesity is determined by an endocrine or neuroendocrine cause. However, this is rare indeed. It has been well studied that sedentary subjects in a metabolic chamber over time expend a baseline of about 1150 calories per day for maintenance. When patients claim they are not losing weight on a diet below 1200 calories per day, it almost invariably means they are not keeping an accurate record of their caloric intake
B. Obesity is generally defined as a body mass index (BMI) >30. Morbid obesity is generally accepted as a BMI >40, and the morbidity of obesity increases with other comorbid variables such as diabetes. The BMI has been a well-validated measure of total body fat and is computed as Body weight (in kg) / height (in meters) squared.
Another measure of obesity is the waist circumference (as measured parallel to the floor at the superior iliac crest or umbilicus) or the ratio of waist circumference to hip circumference. In men with a waist circumference over 40 inches or in women with a waist circumference over 34.5 inches and a BMI of 24-34.9, there is a greater risk of type 2 diabetes, coronary heart disease, dyslipidemia, and hypertension. At BMIs ≥35 there is less correlation with waist circumference and disease.
In general, overweight is broken down by BMI to stratify risk. The best ideal BMI is 22 (levels above and below confer risk for increased mortality). BMIs <25 are considered nil to low risk; 25-30, mild risk; 30–35, moderate risk; 35-40, very significant risk; and >40, severe risk.
Obesity has been correlated with the following morbid or comorbid conditions: osteoarthritis, cholelithiasis, diabetes mellitus, coronary artery disease, sleep apnea, and social stigmatization. There is also a generalized reduction in quality of life in patient surveys.
C. Management of obesity is most successful over both long and short terms if the patient endorses the plan, has frequent follow-up (such as in a group experience), is educated about caloric intake, and exercises for additional caloric expenditure. Many dietary approaches work, and no single approach is successful for all people. Long-term, recidivism is extremely common (as high as 85%) and long-term commitment to exercise is one documented factor that is useful in mitigating recidivism. Extremely-low-fat diets may predispose to cholelithiasis, and there is evidence suggesting either the addition of 10% fat to a diet or the use of chenodeoxycholic acid to prophylax this possibility. There is no proof of a linear increase in weight loss with diets below 800 calories, so it is not necessary to ingest less than that amount in order to lose a maximal amount of weight. As well as empowering the patient with knowledge about diet, exercise, recidivism, and impulse control, realistic expectations about weight loss are important. Patients should not expect to lose more than 5% of their weight in 6 months, though many who adhere to a program lose twice that much in 6 months time.
Other approaches to weight-loss management may involve pharmacologic therapy and bariatric surgery. The American College of Physicians guidelines outline their recommendations for when these modalities should be used, but a brief summary is that if comorbidities (e.g., coronary artery disease and dyslipidemia) are present, the threshold is lower. There are a number of drugs currently approved by the FDA, and they involve differing mechanisms of action. They include: orlistat, sibutramine, diethylpropion, phentermine, benzphetamine, and phendimetrazine. All but orlistat are class III or IV drugs. Newer drugs are available in Europe or in Phase III FDA trials (rimonabant, lorcaserin, and others). Bariatric surgery is reserved for patients with a BMI ≥40 or greater or with significant comorbidities. It is not recommended unless previous, more conservative modalities have been unsuccessful. Mortality is high (about 2% in most studies), even with minimally invasive gastric lap banding, and long-term results are not available. It should be noted that liposuction, in a number of studies, has not been shown to cause improvement in insulin resistance or long-term weight loss.

