Parkinson's disease (PD) was first described by James Parkinson in "An Essay on the Shaking Palsy" in 1817. Clinically, PD is now classically diagnosed as a triad of rest tremor, bradykinesia/akinesia, and cogwheel rigidity. These clinical findings result from degeneration of the dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta of the midbrain. The histopathologic hallmark of PD is the Lewy body. These neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions are typically found in the midbrain.
A. The diagnosis of PD requires the presence of the following symptoms: resting tremor, cogwheel rigidity, bradykinesia/akinesia, and postural instability. In addition to motor symptoms, patients may also have cognitive impairment (see Chronic Behavior Change chapter). The incidence increases with age, from 0.50 per 100,000 in the 30- to 39-year age range to 119.01 per 100,000 in the 80- to 89-year age range.
B. The decision to treat a patient with suspected idiopathic PD is based on several considerations, including age. The first-line therapy, levodopa/carbidopa is preferred in older patients because of a lesser risk of cognitive side effects in this age group compared with the dopamine agonists. The dopamine agonists are classified as ergot or nonergot alkaloids. The ergot compounds are bromocriptine and pergolide. Nonergot agonists include ropinirole, pramipexole, and apomorphine. Pergolide, ropinirole, and pramipexole are frequently used to treat younger patients with PD. Bromocriptine, one of the oldest dopamine agonists, is now rarely used to treat idiopathic PD. The agonists have a higher incidence of hallucinations and somnolence. As a class, they can also cause nausea and dyspepsia. Recently they have been linked to pathologic behavior such as compulsive gambling. The incidence seems to be dose-dependent, and a higher incidence has been noted in patients being treated with pramipexole. Apomorphine was accepted as treatment for PD in the United States in 2004. Because of its strong emetic effect, apomorphine requires premedication with domperidone, an antiemetic. It is administered subcutaneously, has a rapid onset (about 10 minutes), and can last up to 2 hours. Pergolide, an ergot-derived agonist, has been linked to valvular heart disease and to retroperitoneal and pleuropulmonary fibrosis.
C. Two medications may provide neuroprotective benefits in PD. The DATATOP study suggested that selegiline, a monoamine oxidase inhibitor, may exhibit neuroprotective effects. Similar benefit may be seen with high dosages (1200 mg/day) of coenzyme Q10. Some clinicians add these medications to the treatment regimen with the hope that they may provide neuroprotection.
D. As the disease progresses, higher doses of a levodopa/carbidopa or a dopamine agonist are inevitably required. Patients taking dopamine agonist monotherapy will eventually need levodopa/carbidopa for symptomatic relief. For those patients already taking levodopa/carbidopa, entacapone (a COMT [catechol-O-methyltransferase] inhibitor) can be added to lengthen the half-life of the drug. If levodopa/carbidopa begins losing effect (“wearing off") between doses, the dosing interval can be shortened. A controlled-release form of levodopa/carbidopa is often used at nighttime to help reduce symptoms in the morning.
E. Dyskinesias are involuntary movements that can be seen in patients with PD. Their varieties are described in relation to medication dose, usually in relation to peaks and troughs of medication levels. For example, peak-dose dyskinesias usually respond to a decrease in the dose; if the patient is taking a COMT inhibitor, this should be stopped. "Off" dyskinesias can be treated in several ways, including shortening the dosing interval, increasing the dose of levodopa/carbidopa, or adding entacapone.
F. Surgical therapies for PD are another modality of comprehensive therapy for some patients. Deep brain stimulation (DBS) of the subthalamic nucleus is typically reserved for refractory tremor and severe dyskinesia. Extensive evaluation is required prior to the surgery to ensure correct diagnosis and to document the neurologic examination before and after medications. Psychiatric screening is required. Generally, the benefit from DBS is only as good as the patient's best response to medication (“on” time). In most cases, DBS may enable a reduction but not an elimination of dopaminergic therapy.

