A. Pituitary tumors present as incidentalomas following radiographic imaging for another reason, as a result of mass effect (typically visual impairment or headache), or because evidence emerges for either hypofunction or hyperfunction. Tumors can be divided into two groups: Microadenomas are up to 10 mm in size, and anything larger is classified as a macroadenoma. Tumors can be functional or nonfunctional. Clinicians should consider imaging the pituitary in patients who have hypothyroidism with a low or low-normal thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level, are anovulatory with a low or low-normal follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) level, have erectile dysfunction, or have symptoms of hypogonadism with a low or normal luteinizing hormone (LH) level.
B. Any patient with a recognized pituitary tumor should be evaluated with a serum prolactin level. Patients with a macroadenoma should be more carefully evaluated with an assessment of their growth hormone (GH), gonadotropin, thyrotropin, and corticotropin levels.
C. Pituitary hypofunction is suggested by low thyroxine levels with a low TSH. Patients with thyroxine levels below the normal range should be treated with exogenous levothyroxine. Patients with reduced gonadotropins should receive either androgens or estrogens as appropriate. Progesterone replacement should be provided to women with an intact uterus. Estrogen replacement doses do not need to be as high as the doses contained in the oral contraceptive pill. Patients with central hypoadrenalism should be treated with oral glucocorticoids; mineralocorticoid replacement is not necessary in these patients. GH replacement in adults with GH deficiency is controversial.
D. Clinicians should consider whether the pituitary tumor is an adenoma (most common), a meningioma, a metastatic tumor, or a craniopharyngioma, each of which has typical imaging characteristics. Other considerations are a physiologic pituitary enlargement during pregnancy, a pituitary cyst or abscess (often associated with a fluid level on imaging), arteriovenous fistula, or lymphocytic hypophysitis (a rare condition usually associated with late pregnancy and associated with a high incidence of adrenal insufficiency and diabetes insipidus).
E. A serum prolactin level of >200 ng/ml is diagnostic of a prolactinoma. Levels lower than this may be the result of a prolactinoma or any other sellar mass. Prolactin levels should be measured on a diluted sample if the tumor is large and the prolactin level is low. Prolactinomas of any size are best treated with cabergoline or bromocriptine, even when causing apoplexy.
F. Acromegaly is best excluded by measuring the level of serum insulinlike growth factor (IGF)-1. When the level is not diagnostic, GH levels can be measured 2 hours after a 75-g glucose load. Normally the level should fall to ≤1 ng/ml. Patients with acromegaly should be treated with transsphenoidal resection of the tumor. Medical treatment with cabergoline or long-acting somatostatin is first-line treatment for patients who have failed surgery. A GH receptor antagonist and/or radiotherapy may be useful when other medical treatments and surgery have failed.
G. Elevated adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) levels in the presence of Cushing's syndrome suggest either ectopic production of ACTH or Cushing's disease. Inferior petrosal sinus sampling is often indicated to confirm Cushing's disease in such patients. Transsphenoidal resection is the best treatment for Cushing's disease. (See Cushing's Syndrome.)
H. Nonfunctioning pituitary adenomas that are not causing mass effect or pituitary hypofunction can be monitored carefully with repeat imaging every 12 months. Tumors causing mass effect or hypopituitarism should be resected.

