A. Increased plasma hemoglobin (Hb) or hematocrit (Hct) does not necessarily reflect an elevated total body RBC mass. If repeat determinations confirm an increased plasma Hb, RBC mass and plasma volume should be measured using radiolabeled RBC and albumin. This test, however, is performed in only a very small number of centers. The report should contain total RBC mass in percentages (100% being expected normal for the given age, sex, and weight; diagnostic criteria for polycythemia vera [PV] is >25% above the mean) and as total intravascular volume. In the absence of frank volume contraction, a patient with very high Hb (>18.5 g/dl in men and >16.5 g/dl in women) nearly always has an elevated RBC mass and the RBC mass test is not necessary.
B. Increased RBC mass indicates “true” polycythemia. An increase in plasma Hb attributed to a normal or high normal RBC mass and reduced plasma volume is termed spurious polycythemia. In the past, many cases of spurious polycythemia resulted from treatment with diuretics for hypertension. Although such patients do not have an expanded RBC mass, the decreased ratio of plasma to RBC in blood results in unfavorable whole blood rheology. Spurious polycythemia therefore may be associated with a high incidence of morbid arterial thrombotic events. Discontinue diuretics and substitute other forms of treatment, or evaluate the patient to delineate other possible causes of the decreased plasma volume.
C. If the RBC mass is elevated, test ABGs for Hb O2 saturation. When saturation is <90%, hypoxia may cause increased erythropoietin (EPO)production and secondary polycythemia. In some patients, hypoxia occurring only at night is revealed by sleep studies, and it is typically sufficient to elevate EPO levels and cause polycythemia. Nighttime blood gas or oximeter readings may clarify this problem. Regardless of the cause, elevation of Hb levels to above normal generally is considered to result in unfavorable rheology and O2 delivery. Provide supplemental O2 if indicated to lower the EPO stimulus. Right-to-left cardiac shunts can also cause decreased blood O2 content and polycythemia but usually present in childhood.
D. When plasma EPO levels are increased in the absence of hypoxia, consider localized hypoxia within the kidney or impaired O2 delivery. Renal cysts and tumors and hydronephrosis can compress intrarenal vessels and cause local hypoxia, leading to increased renal elaboration of EPO; renal artery stenosis can cause this as well. Ultrasonography or CT of the kidneys usually is diagnostic, but in some patients arteriography is necessary. Certain rare tumors (e.g., hepatomas, cerebellar hemangiomas, pheochromocytoma) can produce ectopic EPO. Rarely, uterine fibromas have also been associated with this finding.
Other less common etiologies of increased EPO production include Bartter's syndrome, EPO receptor hypersensitivity, androgen therapy, and autotransfusions. Secondary polycythemia can occur with normal EPO levels in chronic hypoxia or decreased oxyhemoglobin desaturation. During the initial response to hypoxia, EPO levels are elevated, but once steady-state erythrocytosis is achieved, the EPO levels required to maintain an elevated Hb level may fall within the normal assay range.
E. Levels of abnormal Hb that result in reduced O2 unloading in tissues also cause tissue hypoxia and increased EPO production. The most common cause is probably increased carboxyhemoglobin levels from CO in cigarette smoke. Carboxyhemoglobin levels ≥6% can elevate EPO production and increase Hb levels. Unusual congenital Hbs may also release O2 poorly and cause polycythemia. Both result in a shift in the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve.
F. Patients with normal plasma EPO levels and increased RBC mass have autonomous erythropoiesis, usually PV. In some cases this diagnosis remains unconfirmed because patients may lack other evidence of PV. Such cases have recently been termed pure erythrocytosis and usually are managed by phlebotomy. The Polycythemia Vera Study Group (PVSG) proposed criteria for the diagnosis of PV. In concept, these criteria are clinical findings indicating the presence of a multilineage myeloproliferative disorder. Absence of EPO elevation and normal arterial O2 saturation are assumed because, in the presence of hypoxia, increased erythropoiesis cannot be definitively confirmed to be autonomous. An increased RBC mass also is required. If these findings are noted in a patient with a palpable spleen (major criterion), the diagnosis of PV is established; two more major criteria are clonal genetic abnormality other than Ph chromosome or ber/abl fusion gene in marrow cells and endogenous erythroid colony formation in vitro. If a palpable spleen, genetic abnormality of the bone marrow, and in vitro colony formation are absent, the additional presence of two of the following four minor criteria is required: thrombocytosis >400 million/dl, WBC count >12 million/dl, bone marrow biopsy showing panmyelosis with prominent erythroid and megakaryocytic proliferation, and low serum EPO levels. However, some patients with PV do not meet such criteria. Some present after GI bleeding and may have initially reduced Hb levels. Others lack the full diagnostic criteria but require therapy because of the unfavorable rheologic effects of polycythemia. Presenting symptoms of polycythemia are nonspecific and largely reflect increased blood viscosity. These include headaches, plethora, fatigue, hypertension, pruritus, erythromelalgia, ulceration of fingers and toes, joint pain, epigastric pain, weight loss, paresthesias, visual disturbances, vertigo, tinnitus, and ruddy cyanosis. Some patients have major thrombotic events such as stroke or myocardial infarction or bleeding manifestations. Such patients should not undergo nonemergency surgery until polycythemia has been corrected. For reasons that have not been fully elucidated, polycythemia per se results in a bleeding diathesis. Platelet dysfunction may exacerbate this problem in PV but is often normal at initial presentation.
G. PV is generally managed with phlebotomy to reduce Hb levels to normal. Patients treated with phlebotomy alone show an increased incidence of thrombotic events early in their disease. Management approach to a PV patient should start with a risk stratification. Patients at low risk are those who are <60 years of age, without a history of thrombosis and cardiovascular risk factors (smoking, obesity) and with a platelet count of <1.5 million per microliter. Patients at high risk are the complete opposite. Intermediate risk is neither high risk nor low risk. Patients at low risk are treated with aspirin in addition to phlebotomy, unless they have a history of a hemorrhagic episode or platelet count >1 million and acquired vonWillebrand syndrome. Patients at high risk also should receive myelosuppressive therapy: interferon-a, hydroxyurea, or busulfan is most commonly used. A relatively new agent with profound effects on platelet production, anegrelide, has been used to control elevated platelet counts in PV and other myeloproliferative disorders, but experience with this agent is limited. Prognosis of untreated PV is poor; median survival is 6-18 months, with thrombosis being the most common cause of death. Other causes of mortality in PV are transformation to acute leukemia or to “spent phase" (postpolycythemic myeloid metaplasia) and bleeding.

