Colon cancer will affect 6% of us during our lifetimes. Each year in the United States, there are >140,000 new cases and 50,000 deaths from colorectal carcinoma. Accumulating evidence suggests that screening patients for colorectal neoplasia may either prevent colorectal cancer by detecting colon polyps that may evolve into carcinoma or allow detection of colorectal cancer at a pre-symptomatic earlier stage, making curative therapy more likely. At present this screening strategy consists of (1) testing stool for the presence of blood, most commonly using guaiac-impregnated cards, flushable reagent pads, or immunochemical tests, and (2) directly observing the distal colon by endoscopic or radiographic examinations.
A. The clinical use of a positive fecal occult blood test (FOBT) obtained at the time of digital rectal examination has not been adequately validated. Despite the absence of data regarding accuracy in detecting neoplastic disease, this is a widely accepted and practiced clinical test. It has been estimated that false-positive rates up to 25% occur with FOBT on digital rectal examination. Until the specificity of FOBT by digital rectal examination is clarified, it is recommended that patients undergo FOBT only on spontaneously evacuated stools.
B. Patients should be sent home with FOBT cards, educated about diet and medicine, and asked to provide stool samples. Any one of six samples testing positive should be further evaluated. The test is positive in 4%-6% of asymptomatic patients tested, but only 5%-10% of these have colorectal cancer and 20%-30% have colon polyps; therefore, 60%-70% are false-positive results. In addition, 30%-50% of patients with proven colon cancer have a false-negative test result. Therefore, a positive test leads to further evaluation in many patients without disease, and a negative test result does not exclude disease.
C. For evaluating a patient with a positive FOBT result, two strategies are available: (1) flexible sigmoidoscopy and air-contrast barium enema or (2) colonoscopy, either endoscopic or CT colography. With the first strategy, any positive finding (e.g., polyp or cancer) necessitates colonoscopy. In addition, the first strategy alone misses 10% of cancers and 20% of large polyps. Therefore, colonoscopy is the preferred means of evaluation when available. It also may provide the most cost-effective strategy under certain conditions.
D. If symptoms dictate or if there is iron deficiency, a normal colonoscopy indicates that a further search for GI blood loss from the upper gut is indicated. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) should be performed to evaluate the presence of upper GI structural lesions (ulcer, inflammation, tumors, arteriovenous malformations [AVMs]).
E. Although small bowel tumors, or Crohn's disease of the small bowel, usually do not present with heme-positive stools, a negative endoscopic examination of colon and upper GI tract should prompt evaluation of the small bowel, preferably by capsule endoscopy. However, neither of these tests detects small mucosal lesions such as AVM or small tumors.
F. If stools remain positive for fecal occult blood, consider invasive studies such as angiography or small bowel enteroscopy or capsule, which are now widely available. These may permit visualization of small vascular lesions or tumors undetectable by other means.
G. If a colon cancer or large cherry-red polyp is found, this may be presumed to be the cause of bleeding and may be treated endoscopically or surgically. Similarly the presence of mucosal inflammation (i.e., colitis) is also presumably the source. However, the presence of AVMs or diverticula is not sufficient to exclude either proximal source.

