The following provides a four-step process for managing occupational and nonoccupational exposures to HIV, hepatitis B, and hepatitis C. After obtaining baseline laboratory evaluation for the source and exposed individuals (step 1), the exposure is categorized according to risk (step 2), then the appropriate postexposure prophylaxis (PEP) regimen is chosen (step 3), and a follow-up plan is defined (step 4).

A. Step 1. Baseline Testing: When HIV and hepatitis status of the source patient are not known, the source person should undergo evaluation for HIV antibody (with rapid testing, if available), hepatitis B surface antigen, and hepatitis C antibody. If the source patient is known to be infected with HIV, viral load, antiretroviral treatment history, and genotype testing should be requested. These results guide risk assessment for the exposed individual and the best choice of PEP.
The patient who has been exposed should also have the following baseline tests performed: HIV antibody, hepatitis B screen (surface and core antibody and surface antigen), and hepatitis C antibody. If the source patient is known to be positive for the hepatitis C virus (HCV), the exposed individual should have baseline HCV RNA and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) in addition to hepatitis C antibody testing. If the exposed individual is likely to need antiretroviral prophylaxis, baseline screening laboratory tests should also include a CBC, serum electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, glucose, and liver enzymes.
B. Step 2. Risk Stratification: The risk of transmission of HIV and hepatitis B and C viruses is related to (1) type of exposure (percutaneous, mucous membrane, nonintact skin); (2) type and amount of fluid/tissue involved (blood, fluids with blood, semen or vaginal secretions, cerebrospinal fluid [CSF], synovial, pleural, peritoneal, or amniotic fluids); (3) infectious status of the source patient; and (4) susceptibility of the exposed individual. In the occupational setting, the majority of exposures are via percutaneous injury or mucous membrane/nonintact skin contamination with blood or other body fluids. Outside the health care setting, sexual encounters comprise the majority of exposures.
HIV Exposures. The average risk of becoming infected with HIV from a needlestick exposure ranges from 0.04%-0.3%. Risk is increased when exposure involves a deep injury, when there is visible blood on the device, when the device was in the source patient's vein or artery, or when the source patient has a high viral load. For mucous membrane exposure to HIV-infected blood, the risk of infection is approximately 1%, and for nonintact skin exposures (abrasions, open wounds, dermatitis) risk is <0.1%.
Highest-risk nonoccupational exposures occur when the source patient is known to be HIV infected and the exposure involves needle sharing (IV drug use) or receptive anal intercourse. Insertive anal intercourse and penile-vaginal intercourse are considered lower-risk exposures. Oral sex and sex with a condom in place carry the lowest risk of HIV transmission.
Hepatitis B Exposures. The risk of contracting hepatitis B from needlestick exposure is 6%-30%. Risk of hepatitis B acquisition from a mucous membrane or nonintact skin exposure and through fluids such as semen/vaginal fluid/saliva is difficult to quantify, but transmission via these routes is reported. The presence of hepatitis B surface antibodies secondary to prior vaccination or past infection confers lifelong protective immunity.
Hepatitis C Exposures. Risk of contracting hepatitis C from a needlestick when the source patient is hepatitis C positive is in the range of 1%-7%. Transmission rarely occurs from mucous membrane exposures to blood, and risk from exposure to HCV-infected body fluids other than blood is thought to be extremely low.