A. Proteinuria is the presence of >150 mg/day of protein in the urine. It is often discovered as a positive dipstick test (e.g., Albustix, Multistix) with the degree of proteinuria indicated by a change in color of the reagent, tetrabromophenol blue, ranging from trace (10–30 mg/dl) to 4+ (>1000 mg/dl). Because tetrabromophenol is a pH indicator, the dipstick is buffered to prevent the influence of normal variations in urine pH on color change. False-positive results can occur in very alkaline or concentrated urine; in gross hematuria; in the presence of penicillin, sulfonamides, or tolbutamide; and from contamination with pus, semen, or vaginal secretions. Dipstick protein may be falsely negative with dilute urine or when proteinuria is due to low molecular weight proteins such as light-chain immunoglobulins. Also, dipstick testing is not sufficiently sensitive to detect microalbuminuria (>30 mg/24 hr) and is not appropriate screening for incipient diabetic nephropathy. The sulfosalicylic acid (SSA) turbidity test qualitatively screens for proteinuria. This test should be considered in the workup of patients with suspected paraproteinemia-related renal disease these patients will be dipstick negative for albumin but will have a positive SSA test because of the presence of Bence Jones protein in the urine. The SSA method requires a few milliliters of freshly voided, centrifuged urine. An equal amount of 3% SSA is added to that specimen. Turbidity will result from protein concentrations as low as 4 mg/dl (0.04 g/L).
B. Functional proteinuria describes a transient increase in urinary protein excretion caused by changes in glomerular hemodynamics, such as can occur with vigorous exercise or fever (Table 1). Postural or orthostatic proteinuria is a type of functional proteinuria typically seen in individuals <30 years of age. Proteinuria is absent after a period of being recumbent, such as after a night's sleep, and develops upon rising. Patients with orthostatic proteinuria are usually <30 years of age, have moderate proteinuria (excrete <2 g/day of protein), and have normal kidney function. Orthostatic proteinuria is relatively common, affecting about 3%-5% of adolescents and young adults. To diagnose orthostatic proteinuria, split urine specimens are obtained for comparison. The first-morning void is discarded. A 16-hour daytime specimen is obtained with the patient performing normal activities and finishing the collection by voiding just before bedtime. An 8-hour overnight specimen is then collected. Functional proteinuria, including orthostatic proteinuria, generally follows a benign course, often with spontaneous resolution.
C. Patients with dipstick-positive urinary protein that persists on repeat testing should undergo a quantitative measurement of protein excretion. The urine protein:creatinine ratio (PCR) in a random urine sample provides an estimate of daily urinary protein excretion. This should be confirmed with a 24-hour urine collection. Urinary creatinine excretion should be included in the 24-hour measurement to determine the adequacy of the specimen. Normal urine creatinine excretion varies by age and sex but is roughly 15-25 mg/kg/day. In the absence of diabetes, isolated urinary protein excretion of <300 mg/day can be followed expectantly.
D. Proteinuria ≥300 mg/day that is persistent should be investigated with a careful history (noting prescription, over-the-counter, and illicit drug use), CBC, and thorough physical examination (Table 2). Renal function tests and a CBC should be obtained. Urinalysis should be performed to detect hematuria or signs of urinary tract infection. Evidence of new renal insufficiency or hematuria without concurrent infection should trigger referral to a nephrologist for further serologic evaluation and possible renal biopsy (see Hematuria chapter). Diabetics should have a funduscopic examination to assess for retinopathy. Renal ultrasound should be obtained to evaluate for signs of chronic obstruction or reflux. Large kidneys can be seen with proteinuria because of HIV, diabetes, and infiltrative processes such as amyloidosis. Any signs or symptoms of hepatitis or HIV infection, connective tissue disease, vasculitis, malignancy, or multiple myeloma should be carefully pursued.
E. Nephrotic-range proteinuria (≥3.5 g/day) warrants referral to a nephrologist for further evaluation and possible renal biopsy. The nephrotic syndrome refers to the clinical picture of heavy proteinuria (>3.5 g/day) with edema, hypoalbuminemia (<3.0 g/dl), hyperlipidemia, and lipiduria. The nephrotic syndrome may be a primary process or secondary to a systemic illness. The most common cause of nephrotic syndrome in children is minimal-change disease (accounts for >90% of all cases in children <10 years of age and 50% in children >10 years of age). In adults the most common cause is membranous glomerulopathy in whites and focal segmental glomerulosclerosis in blacks. Important secondary causes of nephrotic syndrome include diabetes mellitus medications including NSAIDs, gold, and penicillamine; infections such as hepatitis B; and autoimmune etiologies such as lupus nephritis. Careful history and evaluation for infection, connective tissue disorder, malignancy, or drug use should uncover most secondary causes. However, serologic evaluation, including for complement, ANA, antistreptolysin assay (ASA titer), hepatitis serologies, and measurement of antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), coupled with a renal biopsy, remains the best means of establishing a definite diagnosis for proteinuria. Patients with renal insufficiency, hematuria without infection, or persistent proteinuria without a clear diagnosis should be referred to a nephrologist and considered for renal biopsy.

