A. Hematuria, palpable abdominal mass, and flank pain are the most common clinical manifestations in a patient with a detectable renal lesion. The widespread use of ultrasound (US) and CT scanning has led to an increased detection of renal lesions. The chance of finding an incidental renal mass on CT scan is 33% for patients >50 years of age. With symptoms of hematuria, palpable abdominal mass, or flank pain, the evaluation should begin with an US and/or CT scan. The test sensitivity of a renal US to detect parenchymal masses is 79%. The renal US does not detect masses <5 mm in diameter. Therefore, a renal CT scan with contrast medium should be performed when visualization is inadequate on the US; the mass is small (<1 cm in diameter); or US examination shows evidence of calcifications, septa, or multiple cysts.
B. Most renal lesions are initially discovered on US. US criteria for the classification of simple renal cyst include: (1) spherical or ovoid shape; (2) absence of internal echoes; (3) presence of a thin, smooth wall that is separate from the surrounding parenchyma; and (4) enhancement of the posterior wall, indicating US transmission through the water-filled cyst. If all of these criteria are satisfied and the patient is asymptomatic, no further evaluation of the cyst is necessary because the likelihood of a malignancy is very small. Simple renal cysts are the most common renal masses, occurring in 50% of patients >50 years of age. Symptomatic patients with the same US findings should undergo CT scanning with contrast. The “gold standard" for evaluating renal masses requires CT images <5 mm in thickness before and after contrast is given. The criteria for diagnosing a benign cyst on CT scan include: (1) a homogeneous attenuation value near that of water, (2) no enhancement with IV contrast material, (3) no measurable thickness of the cyst wall, and (4) smooth interface with renal parenchyma. MRI is typically used to evaluate patients with indeterminate lesions. MRI does not detect calcifications. The suspicion for malignancy should be raised if the benign criteria are not met, calcification is present within a cyst, or repeat studies show an enlarging lesion. CT scan has a sensitivity of 94% for detection of renal parenchymal masses, but MRI is statistically superior to CT scan in the correct characterization of benign lesions. If a cyst meets the criteria for being benign, periodic reevaluation is the standard of care. If the lesion is not consistent with a simple cyst, surgical exploration is recommended.
C. Acquired renal cystic disease occurs in as many as 90% of patients who receive dialysis for 5-10 years. The cysts develop as a consequence of chronic renal insufficiency and may be clinically apparent long before dialysis is instituted.
D. Autosomal-dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is the most common renal hereditary disease and affects 1 in 400-1000 live births. ADPKD is usually recognized in adults between the third and fourth decades of life. Adult polycystic kidney disease (PKD) causes renal insufficiency in 50% individuals by age 70 years and accounts for 10% of dialysis patients in the United States. ADPKD is caused by defective PKD1 gene on chromosome 16p in 85% of cases. A positive diagnosis requires (1) at least two cysts (unilateral or bilateral) in patients <30 years of age, (2) at least two cysts in each kidney in patients aged 30-59 years, or (3) four or more cysts in each kidney in patients >60 years. These age-specific data have been developed in reference to PKD1 patients. Pathology of ADPKD is characterized by massive enlargement of the kidneys secondary to cyst growth and development. The liver also contains cysts in about 40% of patients with ADPKD. Arterial aneurysms of the circle of Willis are found in about 10% of patients. Diagnosis by US is straightforward in advanced disease but may be less reliable in the early stages. CT scan and MRI are more informative, and genetic testing may be required when greater certainty is needed for ADPKD diagnosis.
E. Medullary cystic kidney disease is a rare autosomal-dominant cystic disease characterized by normal- to small-sized kidneys. When cysts are found, they are located at the corticomedullary junction and in the medulla. Diagnosis relies on clinical features with a thorough family history. CT scan is the most sensitive test for cyst detection. The first signs are inability to concentrate the urine and salt wasting, leading to polyuria and polydipsia. Medullary cystic disease progresses inevitably to end-stage renal disease (ESRD) by the age of 20-40 years. Transplantation is the treatment of choice.
F. Medullary sponge kidney usually is not diagnosed before the fourth or fifth decade of life, when patients have secondary calcifications with passage of urinary stones or frequent urinary tract infections. This is a benign disorder with incidence of 1 in 5000 in the general population. The diagnosis is made by IV urography, which shows irregular enlargement of the medullary and interpapillary collecting ducts bilaterally. There is no specific therapy for medullary sponge kidney disease. The patients should be advised to excrete >2 L of urine per day and may benefit from a thiazide diuretic for hypercalciuria, allopurinol for hyperuricosuria, or potassium citrate for hypocitraturia.
G. Renal cell cancer occurs at a rate of 7.5 cases per 100,000 population annually. It accounts for >80% of renal malignancies in adults and occurs more often in men than in women. Risk factors for renal cell carcinoma are smoking, chemicals such as cadmium and nitroso hydrocarbons, acquired cystic disease in ESRD, and Hippel-Lindau disease. Patients may present with hematuria, abdominal mass, flank pain, fever, weight loss, or vericocoele, but many patients are asymptomatic until the disease is advanced. Laboratory findings include anemia or erythrocytosis, hepatic dysfunction, and hypercalcemia. CT scan with radiographic contrast is currently the most widely available, sensitive, and accurate nonoperative method available for making a presumptive diagnosis of renal cancer and its staging. Nuclear MRI is used over CT scanning (1) when detecting tumors in regional lymph nodes and extension into the renal veins and inferior vena cava, (2) in patients with radiographic contrast allergy, and (3) when CT results are equivocal. For patients without distant metastases the treatment of choice is radical nephrectomy. The average survival of patients with metastases is only 6-9 months. Postoperative adjuvant radiation, hormonal therapy, and chemotherapy are not proven to prolong survival.

