A. Scleroderma is a heterogeneous group of conditions associated with thickened, sclerotic skin, including diffuse cutaneous systemic sclerosis (DcSSc) and limited cutaneous systemic sclerosis (LcSSc, CREST syndrome [calcinosis, Raynaud's phenomenon, esophageal dysmotility, sclerodactyly, and telangiectasias]). It is more common in women than in men and usually presents between the ages of 30 and 50 years. The clinical course is highly variable, ranging from a self-limited to a progressive, fatal condition. Raynaud's phenomenon is a common presenting symptom. Skin thickening may be preceded by swelling with pitting edema and often progresses to ulceration and tethering of skin to underlying structures. Patients may have internal organ involvement of the GI tract, heart, lungs, and kidneys.
B. The initial approach to a patient with skin tightening should focus on determining the extent of cutaneous involvement and the presence of signs and symptoms of systemic involvement.
C. Patients with LeSSc, or CREST syndrome, have skin thickening limited to the hands and feet (sclerodactyly) but may also involve the face. Calcinosis is often noted over the hands, fingers, and olecranon bursa. Telangiectasias are seen on the palms, face, and lips. Patients often have a positive ANA in a centromere pattern. Patients should be evaluated and treated for esophageal dysmotility and pulmonary hypertension when present.
D. Patients with DeSSe have skin thickening of the hands and feet extending proximally and to the face, neck, and trunk. Skin tightening and tethering may cause joint contractures and ulcerations. Skin tightening around the mouth can limit the oral aperture, making eating and oral hygiene difficult. Raynaud's phenomenon, affecting >90% of patients, should be managed with behavior modification (i.e., avoiding exacerbating factors); however, pharmacologic or even surgical therapy may be necessary. Serologic evaluation is notable for the anti-Scl-70 antibody in 20% of patients. It is important to determine the extent of involvement to guide treatment.
E. Renal crisis, one of the most feared complications of DcSSc, presents with hypertension and acute renal failure. The urinary sediment contains mild proteinuria and few to absent cells and casts. High dosages of corticosteroids may increase the risk of renal crisis. Monitoring blood pressure may allow early detection. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors are the primary treatment of renal crisis and may play a prophylactic role.
F. Pulmonary disease occurs in approximately 70% of patients with DeSSc in the form of interstitial lung disease with alveolitis and pulmonary hypertension. Patients usually present with dyspnea and a dry cough. Evaluation initially consists of chest x-ray, pulmonary function tests, and echocardiogram; and, if abnormal, high-resolution chest CT scan and bronchoscopy are useful. Treatment with immunosuppression is often begun, but prospective controlled trials are under way to determine whether they truly improve outcomes.
G. The most frequent internal organ system involved in scleroderma is the GI tract. Esophageal hypomotility and esophageal sphincter dysfunction result in gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). Patients should be evaluated for GERD and treated aggressively. Patients may have lower GI tract dysmotility, resulting in constipation and malabsorption. Promotility agents may be helpful.
H. Cardiac manifestations of scleroderma may include pericarditis, cardiomyopathy, and arrhythmias. Patients may require an ECG, Holter monitor, or echocardiogram if cardiac involvement is suspected.
I. Localized scleroderma (morphea and linear scleroderma) does not have internal organ involvement. It can occur virtually on any part of the body. Patients may have multiple plaques ranging in size from 1–30 cm. Facial involvement resulting in a depressed appearance is called en coup de sabre (the slash of the sword).
J. Eosinophilic fasciitis is a scleroderma-like disease characterized by inflammation and thickening of the deep fascia. The skin may have an “orange-peel” appearance. The CBC is notable for eosinophilia. Raynaud's phenomenon and internal organ involvement are absent. Scleredema and scleromyxedema should also be considered in the evaluation of skin thickening.
K. Skin thickening may be seen in several disorders, including diabetes, POEMS hypothyroidism (polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, M protein, and skin changes), and chronic graft versus host disease (GVHD). Nephrogenic fibrosing dermopathy (NFD) is characterized by cutaneous fibrosis of the upper and lower limbs in patients receiving hemodialysis. Amyloidosis, bleomycin, and exposures to organic solvents may produce skin thickening as well.

