A seizure involves temporary abnormal electrical activity in a group of brain neurons resulting in alteration of brain function. Approximately 2%-5% of the population will have at least one nonfebrile seizure during their lifetime. Seizures can be the result of an acute process, a previous intracranial insult, or a developmental lesion, or they may be idiopathic.

A. The differential diagnosis of a seizure-like episode, or spell, includes syncope and postsyncopal convulsive movements, movement disorder or tremor, cerebrovascular events, sleep disorders such as narcolepsy/cataplexy, migraine, and a psychogenic seizure. At times, the diagnosis may require consultation with a neurologist and inpatient video EEG monitoring.
B. There are many types of seizures. Seizures can cause involuntary changes in body movement or function. Seizures typically last 30 seconds to 2 minutes but can last much longer, resulting in status epilepticus (see Status Epilepticus chapter). Seizures can be symptomatic of an acute neurologic, metabolic, or toxic process. Drug or alcohol withdrawal may result in seizures. In pregnancy and the postpartum period a seizure can be a sign of eclampsia. Classification of seizure type has important implications for possible etiologies, diagnostic tests, and treatment recommendations.
C. Seizures that begin focally are classified as focal or partial seizures. Often the patient does not recall the seizure, and a detailed history of the event from a witness can be helpful. Even when the seizure is reported as a convulsion, it may be the result of a secondarily generalized seizure, and a search for a history of auras or signs of a focal onset by history is important. The symptoms of a focal seizure depend on where in the brain the abnormal electrical activity occurs. A focal seizure can be rhythmic focal motor activity that either remains localized or progresses to involve other parts of the body (Jacksonian march). Focal seizures can also be subtle, such as a marching paresthesia of a part of the body, a feeling of déjà vu or fear, a strange epigastric sensation, an unpleasant odor, or visual hallucinations. Focal seizures are typically classified as motor, sensory, autonomic, or psychic. Focal seizures with preservation of consciousness are simple partial seizures. If there is alteration of consciousness, the seizure is classified as a complex partial seizure. During a complex partial seizure, the patient may appear confused or dazed, exhibit automatisms (e.g., lip smacking, hand picking behavior), or not respond to questions. Focal seizures may begin as either simple or complex and may progress very quickly to convulsions (i.e., secondarily generalized seizures, grand mal seizure).
D. A primary generalized seizure can be convulsive or nonconvulsive. Nonconvulsive seizures include petit mal seizures that begin in childhood and consist of brief episodes of eye fluttering and unresponsiveness with a characteristic 3-Hz spike and wave pattern seen on EEG during the seizure. Tonic and atonic seizures result in sudden "drop attacks.” Myoclonic seizures consist of brief jerks of muscle contraction and relaxation with epileptiform activity seen on EEG. Primary convulsive seizures are also referred to as grand mal seizures.
E. Important features of the history include possible provocative factors (e.g., alcohol/drug withdrawal, seizure-provoking drugs, or medications), other risk factors for seizure (known history of brain injury, stroke, brain infection, or other cerebral disorder), family history of seizure, and history of previous seizures or transient neurologic events (including febrile seizures). A complete medical and neurologic examination is critical. A history of malignancy; immunocompromise; and/or physical signs of fever, change in mental status, or focal neurologic deficit should prompt urgent evaluation.
F. The initial management of a patient with acute seizure starts with stabilization of airway, breathing, and circulation (ABC). Thiamine and glucose should be provided acutely unless hypoglycemia has otherwise been ruled out. If the patient is febrile, consider brain infection, empiric meningitis/encephalitis treatment, CT, and lumbar puncture. Other testing includes MRI (with gadolinium if there are clinical signs of infection or a history of malignancy), EEG, metabolic profile, human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) in women of childbearing age, and toxicology screen.
G. Epilepsy is defined as a tendency for recurrent seizures and is diagnosed if there is a history of more than one unprovoked seizure. In most cases antiepileptic medication in indicated. Information regarding driving, safety precautions, medication options, and seizure first aid is available at www.epilepsyfoundation.org and www.epilepsy.com.
H. If there is one uncomplicated, unprovoked seizure, the risk of recurrence is 34% at 3-year follow-up. With a normal MRI and EEG result, it is reasonable to not treat prophylactically depending on physician and patient preference.
I. Structural lesions, preexisting neurologic deficits, focal neurologic examination, and abnormal EEG are associated with an increased risk of recurrence of at least 60%. In many circumstances, antiepileptic prophylaxis is warranted. An acute symptomatic seizure, such as in the setting of stroke or brain infection, may be treated prophylactically, although the exact indications for and duration of treatment are individualized.
J. A variety of antiepileptic medications are currently available. Lorazepam and other benzodiazepines are helpful acutely. Phenobarbital, phenytoin, and valproic acid can be given intravenously. Carbamazepine, gabapentin, lamotrigine, levetiracetam, oxcarbazepine, pregabalin, and zonisamide are all commonly used agents. The specific agent recommended will depend on the seizure type, comorbidities, and patient characteristics and lifestyle.

