The evaluation of the patient with chronic kidney disease (CKD) for transplantation should begin before initiation of dialysis. This allows preemptive transplantation if a living donor is available. Even if living donation is not feasible, early completion of the evaluation means that the patient can be listed for a deceased donor transplant as soon as dialysis is started. The initial evaluation must be thorough. The general purpose of the initial evaluation is, first, to ensure that there are no medical, surgical, immunologic, or psychosocial contraindications to transplant; second, to extensively educate the patient as to the risks and benefits of transplantation; and third, to determine which type of kidney transplant(s) is best for the patient.

A. A comprehensive history is essential, but one should focus on the following: cause of end-stage renal disease (ESRD), previous transplant history, comorbid illnesses, social supports, and functional status. Certain conditions such as primary focal glomerulosclerosis or nondiarrheal hemolytic uremic syndrome-can recur in the transplanted kidney, and very careful assessment is required of the risks versus benefits of transplantation in such cases. A comprehensive examination is also required but with focus on overall general health (will this patient tolerate the stresses of transplant surgery and immunosuppression?), signs of decompensated heart or lung disease, and signs of peripheral vascular disease.
B. Standard tests in all patients include ABO blood typing and human leukocyte antigen (HLA) tissue typing; CBC; chemistry panel; calcium; glucose; parathyroid hormone (PTH); chest x-ray (CXR); ECG; urinalysis; urine culture; and tests for exposure to HIV, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, and syphilis. Most patients require some form of non-invasive testing for coronary artery disease. Those >50 years should be screened for bowel neoplasia by stool occult blood or colonoscopy. Women should be screened for breast and cervical cancer according to standard guidelines. Many centers check prostate-specific antigen (PSA) in males >50 years.
C. Contraindications to renal transplantation include any major morbidity that would be worsened by transplant or would lead to very short posttransplant survival, severe organ failure (e.g., liver or heart failure), recent cancer, severe obesity, significant infection (e.g., active tuberculosis), and severe psychiatric illness or predicted noncompliance. Depending on the cancer, a recurrence-free period of 2–5 years is usually required before transplant is deemed safe.
D. A current positive T-cell crossmatch (indicating the presence of noxious antibodies against class I HLA antigens of the donor) or incompatibility of the ABO blood group system between potential donor and recipient are both immunologic contraindications because of the very high risk of severe antibody-mediated rejection. In living donation, this problem can sometimes be circumvented by exchange programs or by neutralizing the noxious antibodies of the recipient.
E. The kidney donor options must be carefully discussed with the patient. The best functioning transplants are those derived from living donors; however, many patients do not have suitable living donors and must remain on the waiting list for many years. Certain patients-typically those >60 years or people >50 years with diabetes—should be listed also for expanded criteria donor (ECD) kidneys. By definition, these kidneys have poorer survival than “regular" deceased donor kidneys. However, they are still associated with a survival benefit as opposed to continuing dialysis.
F. Because patients often wait many years on the list, the transplant center should review their overall medical status and suitability for transplant every 1-2 years. This is especially important in people with diabetes, who have such high incidence of cardiovascular disease.

