A. The algorithm for this chapter starts at a point where a patient is suspected of inflammatory arthritis and serologic testing is negative for rheumatoid factor. Inflammatory arthritis is suggested by morning stiffness lasting >30 minutes, improvement rather than worsening with exercise, and soft-tissue swelling. Notable among the seronegative arthritides are the spondyloarthropathies, including ankylosing spondylitis, reactive arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, and arthritis associated with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).
B. The distinction between inflammatory and degenerative disease, particularly of the spine, hip, and shoulder joints, is often difficult. Elevated ESR and C-reactive protein (CRP) are nonspecific and insensitive markers of seronegative arthritis but are nevertheless suggestive of inflammatory disease if elevated. The presence of effusion in a peripheral joint is suggestive of inflammatory arthritis, which can be documented by aspiration of synovial fluid having a WBC count of >2000 cells/mm³. Human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-B27 is highly associated with ankylosing spondylitis and reactive arthritis syndromes that include the extraarticular manifestations described later (Reiter's syndrome). HLA-B27 is less strongly linked to arthritis associated with IBD or psoriasis unless the syndrome features spinal arthritis and/or anterior uveitis (iritis). Because HLA-B27 is common in populations at risk for seronegative arthritides, testing is only theoretically helpful when the pretest probability of ankylosing spondylitis is between 30% and 70%, a problematic estimation in routine practice. An infectious workup is indicated in the event of acute onset of seronegative arthritis with or without extracellular manifestations. Stool culture for Salmonella, Shigella, Yersinia, and Campylobacter should be considered, as should urethral swab or urine testing for Chlamydia. Streptococcal and other infections are also associated with reactive inflammatory syndromes involving arthritis, but these are not associated with HLA-B27 and do not present with the characteristic features of the spondyloarthropathies.
C. Spinal and/or sacroiliac (SI) involvement is suggested by low back pain and stiffness, neck pain and stiffness, or posterior thoracic pain with deep breathing or coughing. Schober's test is sensitive for lumbar spine disease but is nonspecific. With the patient standing, a mark is made at the L5 level (“dimples of Venus”) and another 10 cm above. The patient is asked to flex the trunk forward with the arms hanging down toward the floor (and may bend the legs slightly so as to avoid a false-positive test result because of hamstring tightness), and the space between the points is measured. Expansion to <15 cm is abnormal. Chest expansion should be measured from forced expiration to full inspiration; expansion >5 cm is normal, and <2.5 cm is clearly abnormal. Physical examination tests for SI joint pathology are insensitive and nonspecific.
D. Radiography of the SI joints should be done to look for evidence of erosive disease suggestive of inflammation. An anteroposterior (AP) view of the pelvis is usually sufficient, although the Ferguson view is probably more sensitive. Radiography of the spine may show characteristic bony changes at the corners of the vertebral bodies (syndesmophytes). Radiographic changes usually occur only after several years of disease; earlier, CT, MRI, and bone scan are more sensitive, although bone scan does not distinguish between inflammatory and degenerative disease. All patients with ankylosing spondylitis have SI and/or spinal arthritis, but the spine is involved in a minority of patients with other spondyloarthropathies.
E. Peripheral joint involvement is often asymmetric; oligoarticular; and most common in proximal and lower extremity joints in ankylosing spondylitis, reactive arthritis, and IBD-associated arthritis. Patients with psoriatic arthritis can have symmetric polyarthritis that resembles rheumatoid arthritis, asymmetric oligoarthritis resembling the other spondyloarthropathies, or arthritis limited to several distal interphalangeal (DIP) joints. Often multiple joints and the intervening soft tissue are inflamed in a single digit, creating a “sausage digit” (dactylitis), particularly in psoriatic and reactive arthritis. Tenosynovitis is also common, particularly around the hand/wrist and foot/ankle, in these conditions.
F. The integumentary findings in psoriasis are most common on the extensor surfaces of the elbows and knees; other particularly common locations include the low back, hands and feet, scalp, umbilicus, gluteal cleft, and glans penis. Nail pitting and onycholysis are common and are associated with arthritis. Clinically and histologically similar lesions can occur acutely in reactive arthritis: keratoderma blennorrhagica of the feet, circinate balanitis, and nail pitting. Erythema nodosum is a syndrome of painful, red, cutaneous nodules on the lower legs and is common in IBD. Pyoderma gangrenosa is a more severe and less common neutrophilic dermatosis associated with IBD.
G. Conjunctivitis is part of the classic triad of Reiter's syndrome. However, anterior uveitis (iritis) is also common in reactive arthritis and in ankylosing spondylitis and IBD. A recent history of self-limited diarrhea and abdominal pain suggests a precipitating episode of gastroenteritis; a chronic history raises suspicion for IBD. Urethritis may suggest recent infection with Chlamydia. Patients with reactive arthritis may develop cardiac conduction defects that are generally not serious. Over the longer term, patients with ankylosing spondylitis may develop inflammation of the ascending aorta, leading to aortic valve insufficiency and/or aneurysm.
H. Noninflammatory disease of the spine is common. Degenerative disk disease and osteoarthritis of the spine and SI joints appear different on radiography, featuring disk shrinkage and marginal osteophytes rather than syndesmophytes. Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH) is a noninflammatory disease that features exuberant ossification at sites of tendon and ligament attachment, including the spine, often in a patchy distribution and usually on the right side.

