The U.S. Surgeon General has determined that the leading preventable cause of death and disability in the United States is cigarette smoking. Annually, 3 million deaths worldwide are attributed to smoking. This toll is expected to reach 10 million by 2025. Although 75% of all adults visit a physician at least once a year, smokers visit more often because of increased illness. The first step in smoking cessation is to identify the smoker by simply asking, “Do you smoke?” Although a few smokers may be evasive about their smoking, most admit it, and surveys show that 80% say they would like to quit. It is estimated that there are 46 million people continuing to smoke as a result of addiction.

A. Congratulate patients who are nonsmokers. Encourage patients who have quit to maintain their cessation. Counsel preteens and teens about peer pressure, targeted advertising, and the fallacy of smoking as a way to appear more grown up. Work is being done currently to develop and test nicotine vaccines that, if efficacious, could be used to vaccinate teenagers at risk for initiation of smoking. Additional work is being conducted to determine the pharmacogenetics of those at greatest risk.
B. Inform smokers of the adverse health consequences of smoking and the benefits of stopping, emphasize the damage or disease already present, motivate them to consider quitting, and give firm and unequivocal advice to quit. Use guided questions such as, “Are you aware of the effects of smoking on your health?” Make the patient aware of any physical findings that are present and related to smoking in an effort to personalize the effects of smoking. Mention the benefits of quitting now, including lower risk of cancer, sudden death, or myocardial infarction (MI) and longer active life (at any age). Many smokers are fatalistic and unaware of the reversibility of smoking-related disease and risk. Make a statement such as, “As your physician, I must advise you that smoking is bad for your health."
C. One can sense whether a patient is contemplating quitting by his or her responses to questions such as, “How do you feel about being a smoker? What reasons do you have to quit? Were you able to stop smoking in the past? How did you do it that time? What caused you to start again? If you had that chance again, what would you do differently?" The purpose of these questions is to allow insight, build confidence, problem solve, and begin a plan for a new successful cessation attempt. Then a critical series of questions can be posed: “Have you thought about stopping? Do you think you can stop now? How will you do it? May I help you quit?”
D. At this point, some patients do not show adequate motivation or are unwilling to discuss or plan a cessation attempt. These people often lack the confidence that they can be successful and are unwilling to risk their self-esteem if they fail. Some investigators believe that these patients should sign a waiver stating they have been informed of the risks and for the moment are choosing to smoke against the physician's advice. They can be given a brochure to read, and the subject can be broached again on subsequent visits. Watch for a possible critical incident (e.g., acute illness; MI in patient, friend, or relative; cancer; pregnancy; death of a valued person) as a time when contemplation can be changed to action.
E. Patients who are ambivalent often are unwilling to choose a quit date or sign a contract to quit but may be willing to do other things. A smoking diary can help document when, where, what they were doing, with whom, and the value of the cigarette from 1 (crucial) to 5 (not very important). The diary helps build awareness. It can be accompanied by tapering (i.e., eliminating the not-very-important cigarettes). Other techniques include switching to cigarettes with lower tar and nicotine content and smoking fewer cigarettes each day. These measures are mainly directed at building confidence for a successful cessation attempt. Until patients are ready to change, it is better not to court failure. Awareness that newer pharmacologic agents are available may help to convince a person who is ambivalent to try quitting.
F. For patients ready to quit, a quit date should be set and a contract signed. These can be preprinted or simply written in the chart. The contract can serve as an additional reminder if it is on duplicate paper with a chart copy and another copy placed in a prominent location selected by the patient (e.g., refrigerator, mirror). Some patients may keep a smoking diary for a few days to increase awareness of when, where, and why they smoke. Once the quit date is chosen, develop an action plan with the patient to determine who will be the support people at home and at work and how weight gain will be handled (increased exercise, low-calorie diet, use of bupropion or nicotine replacement therapy [NRT]). As the lungs return to normal, patients often begin to cough; it is worth emphasizing this in a positive light (i.e., cleansing of the lungs). Tell patients to use a cough suppressant only as a last resort to help them sleep. Those patients who choose varenicline (Chantix) should start the medication 1 week before their actual quit date so that they will be taking a full dose when they stop using cigarettes.
G. The decision to use NRT is based on whether the patient is heavily addicted to nicotine. This can be ascertained by historical data or the response to two questions: "Do you smoke within 30 minutes after rising in the morning?” and “Do you smoke more than 25 cigarettes a day?" One can also use the historical information of a previous attempt at quitting that was aborted because of withdrawal signs or symptoms. These patients may do better with NRT.
H1.For the individual who is nicotine dependent, one should offer both pharmacologic and psychologic intervention and discuss the options so patients can select the best choice for them. We suggest one continuous medication (patch) and one acute medication (inhaler, lozenge, or gum). The latter allows an acute dose that simulates the acute pulse of nicotine desired during acute craving. If varenicline is selected, neither an acute or chronic NRT medication is warranted because its mode of action is through nicotine blockade. Varenicline must be started 1 week before the quit date with an adjustment up to full dose. The choice of NRT should be approached as a menu of opportunities by the physician and patient. The agents available include nicotine polacrilex gum, nicotine-containing dermal patches, nasal spray, oral inhalers, nicotine-containing lozenges/microtabs, and psychoactive agents such as bupropion and varenicline. Clonidine and nortriptyline are now considered second-line agents because of frequent adverse effects. Some patients cannot chew gum because of dental work or temporomandibular joint problems or because they have tried the gum before and lack confidence in it. For these patients transdermal patches may be indicated. Other patients may be smoking a small number of cigarettes each day or may prefer not to use nicotine replacement; for these patients a trial of cessation without replacement therapy may be appropriate, or bupropion or varenicline alone may be added. All of these agents have been shown to increase the likelihood of success by from 1.5–3 times that of placebo. A minority of individuals may be smoking a small number of cigarettes a day or may wish to go “cold turkey” on their own. For those patients who are insistent and display confidence, a trial of cessation without NRT may be warranted. Careful follow-up should be used with this group.
For patients who are heavily addicted and choose to use gum, offer nicotine (Nicorette) gum, now available in multiple flavors and much more palatable than the early products. This can be done on a timed schedule and gradually tapered after the psychological aspects of addiction have abated. Many people who are unsuccessful in stopping do not use enough Nicorette gum or may use it incorrectly. For all patients beginning cessation, maintain close follow-up or contact over the first several days or weeks. This can be accomplished by a call from a staff member or by having patients call in with a report of how they are doing. The purpose of this is to identify slips (brief relapses) early and plan how to manage them and start the cessation attempt again. One slip is not a failure, and most patients who are successful have had to deal with three or four relapses. The details of relapse are important, and if acute craving is the cause, an acute NRT agent such as nasal spray, a lozenge, gum, or an inhaler may be added.
H2.Once the choice of medical therapy is made, one should consider a choice about counseling that has been shown to be a crucial part of care. The approaches include individual (you as the clinician or a member of your staff) or a cessation counselor, group (as with a cancer society or lung association group, hospital, or health care plan group), via phone as provided again by pharmaceutical manufacturers, health plans, and so on. Internet support has become available, but its efficacy is untested. Success in quitting correlates with more social support, with each additional means of psychological support raising the likelihood of success.
I. For successful patients, praise and support should be part of the maintenance plan.
J. For those who relapse, analyzing the cause for the relapse is helpful in designing subsequent therapy; starting again at F makes sense. Two forms of Nicorette are available, 2 or 4 mg. Depending on the patient's overall pack-year history and smoking pattern, an initial 2-mg dose helps taper craving for the nicotine in the cigarettes. David Sachs of Stanford suggests that a rule of 4s be followed with an eventual taper (i.e., 1 pack per day [ppd], 12 pieces Nicorette/day; 1.5 ppd, 16 pieces/day; 2 ppd, 20 pieces/day). He also suggests a chew, stop, and park regimen for the user (i.e., chew slowly until a tingle is felt, stop chewing and park the medication between cheek and gum, restart chewing when the tingle is gone, and stop when the tingle returns).
K. All future physician visits should include follow-up questions on cessation with reinforcement and praise for continued success.
L. For individuals who are addicted and for whom the transdermal nicotine patches are appropriate, the first dose is determined by amount of smoking and patient size.
M. Those weighing <105 pounds or smoking <20 cigarettes per day or who have frequent angina attacks should be considered for a 14-mg starting dose. Those who do not tolerate the 21-mg patch because of excess nicotine symptoms may do better on the lower dosage. The 14-mg dose is continued for at least 1 month.
N. Most smokers who are heavily addicted (with the exceptions noted in M) should begin with the 21-mg transdermal patch. This is continued for 1 month. Patients often report vivid, altered, or increased dreaming while using the 21-mg patch. Erythema develops beneath the patch in most patients. Patches should be moved to a new location each day. The manufacturer's instructions should be carefully followed. The patient must not smoke while using patches because this can lead to nicotine toxicity, increased angina, or MI. A small percentage of patients develop severe skin reactions (1%-3%) at the patch site. These patients should be managed using gum, inhaler, nasal spray, and/or bupropion or varenicline. After the initial dosage, the dose should be tapered, as suggested by the manufacturer.
O. Continue close follow-up and support as outlined in I and K. The patient who relapses while using patches should have the failure analyzed and if from acute craving, have an acute agent added to the last patch dose at which the relapse occurred.
P. Nasal spray delivers an earlier peak of nicotine than gum, inhaler, lozenges, or patches. The dose is one squirt per nostril with both nostrils being treated. The dosing schedule is two per hour. The spray may be used in conjunction with the patch for treatment of acute craving. Spray may be chosen by those smokers who need the “rush” effect of lighting up.
Q. Nicotine inhalers became available in the late 1990s and still require a prescription to be dispensed. The inhaler adds the physical benefit of “handling behavior" like handling a cigarette. It provides the patient with a mechanism that he or she controls to adjust dosing. Most of the nicotine absorbed from the inhaler is taken in through the oral mucosa, the esophagus, and stomach, with only a small amount being absorbed via the lungs. Used alone, it doubles quit rates over placebo and gives higher rates when coupled with the patch.
R. Bupropion (Wellbutrin, Zyban) has been shown to produce 20%-23% 1-year cessation rates when first used at a dosage of 150 mg twice a day. It is currently available in sustained-release form, which has decreased the seizure risk while enhancing efficacy. Cessation rates varied from 20% to nearly 45% with doses of 100-300 mg/day for 7 weeks. Bupropion can help reduce cigarette use in those attempting to taper daily use and gives additional efficacy when coupled with NRT. It may have a special role in those patients who are recently recovering from MI because, unlike NRT, it has no acute cardiac side effects. It seems to blunt the risk of weight gain with smoking cessation and has a Class B designation for use in pregnancy. Its side effects include xerostomia, headaches, and insomnia. It should not be used in those with a history of or predisposition to seizures.
S. Nortriptyline has been listed as a second-line therapy by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. It has been used for smoking cessation in patients both with and without depression. When used with the “patch,” it enhanced cessation rates over transdermal systems alone.
T. Varenicline (Chantix) is a new pharmacologic agent that binds with high affinity and selectivity at the alpha4beta2 neuronal nicotine acetylcholine receptor, thus producing agonist activity. The recommended dosage begins 1 week before the quit date with 0.5 mg orally for days 1–3. Then 0.5 mg is given orally twice a day for days 4-7 and then 1 mg orally from day 8 to completion of therapy. The initial course of treatment is for 12 weeks; for those who remain abstinent, therapy should be continued for another 12 weeks. Recent warnings have appeared regarding mood swings, depression, suicidal ideation, and attempted and completed suicides in those taking varenicline, thus prompting close psychological monitoring of these patients while receiving treatment.

