A. A solitary pulmonary nodule (SPN) is a lesion <3 cm in diameter completely surrounded by pulmonary parenchyma and without other abnormalities. An incidental nodule is an uncommon finding in routine chest radiographs, but it is an increasingly common finding on CT scans. Although the majority of these lesions are benign, the possibility that the lesion represents a malignancy cannot be ignored. The 5-year survival for stage IA lung cancer with resection is 60%-80%, which contrasts with the dismal overall survival of lung cancer, which is 5%-16%. Despite these figures, screening has not been proved to reduce mortality from lung cancer and cannot be routinely recommended. Large-scale studies of the value of CT screening are currently ongoing and may lead to a different conclusion.
B. In addition to bronchogenic carcinoma, the differential diagnosis also includes other tumors such as carcinoid and metastatic disease. The most common benign cause of SPN in most series is granuloma, often resulting from prior infection from endemic fungi or mycobacterium. Other etiologies include chronic inflammation; fibrosis; benign neoplasms such as hamartomas and fibromas; infections such as pneumonia, round pneumonia, abscess, echinococcus, and Dirofilaria; inflammatory lesions such as Wegener's and rheumatoid nodules; and miscellaneous causes such as bronchogenic cysts, amyloid, intrapulmonary lymph nodes, rounded atelectasis, and mucoid impaction.
C. Standard practice dictates that stability over 2 years indicates the lesion is likely benign and no further follow-up is necessary. Previous stability in imaging does not always obviate the need for follow-up because some malignancies, such as bronchoalveolar cell carcinoma (BAC), can grow slowly. Thus, studies that are >2 years prior to the current film may be helpful, especially for lesions that do not appear entirely solid.
D. If the initial diagnosis was not made by a high-resolution chest CT, one should be obtained. A high-resolution CT scan allows better estimation of lesion size, calcification, and other characteristics. The addition of IV contrast is recommended by some experts because certain benign etiologies, such as arteriovenous fistulas, are more clearly identified. A CT scan may also reveal an alternative diagnosis. Commonly, multiple nodules are discovered and these should be approached differently than the SPN (see the section on multiple pulmonary nodules).
E. Risk assessment involves radiographic and patient factors. Larger lesions are usually malignant; very small (<5 mm) lesions are nearly always benign. Laminated, central, or popcorn calcification; smooth borders; and the presence of fat or cartilage are characteristic of benign lesions. The corona radiata sign, a spiculated appearance, thick-walled cavitation, and eccentric or stippled calcification are consistent with a malignancy. Clinical factors such as age, prior malignancy, hemoptysis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), certain environmental exposures, and history of lung cancer in a first-degree relative also increase the chances that the nodule represents cancer. Several studies have outlined approaches for risk stratification based on these characteristics; however, none have been universally accepted.
F. Patients at low risk (without any of the previously mentioned risk factors) can be followed clinically and radiographically. Historically, a repeat CT chest at 3, 6, 9, 12, and 24 months has been recommended. Recently published guidelines from the Fleischner Society suggest fewer CT scans may be feasible for lesions <8 mm. According to these recommendations, no repeat CT scan is necessary for lesions <5 mm in the absence of other risk factors.
G. Patients at moderate risk generally warrant further investigation. One exception may be when the clinician suspects an inflammatory or infectious etiology. In this case, a repeat CT scan in 4–6 weeks after appropriate therapy can demonstrate resolution and obviate further evaluation. For the remainder of the patients, options often depend on the specifics of the location of the lesion, patient characteristics, and the expertise at a given institution. Positron emission tomography (PET) scans have good sensitivity (>95% in some studies) and good specificity for lesions >1 cm. False-negative results can occur with slowly growing tumors, and false-positive results can occur in lesions with high metabolic activity, such as infection. CT-guided transthoracic needle aspiration may be especially useful in peripheral lesions, with a high sensitivity (approximately 90%) for malignancy, although it is less helpful for benign causes of SPN. Endobronchial lesions or lesions with a “feeding bronchus” may be best sampled by bronchoscopy. Finally, sputum cytology is noninvasive and is helpful if positive, although the sensitivity is quite low.
H. Most patients at high risk should have the SPN resected. This is usually feasible via video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) instead of standard thoracotomy, with less morbidity. In those in whom the risk of surgery is prohibitive or in those who decline surgery, alternatives for treatment of malignancy do exist and may include radiation, chemotherapy, and novel therapies such as radiofrequency ablation.

