Approximately 5% of systemic cancers involve the spinal cord. Spinal cord compression is a medical emergency in which a delay in treatment often causes irreversible loss of neurologic function.
A. Tumors that most commonly affect the spinal cord are of the lung, breast, prostate, and lymph nodes. Myeloma, melanoma, and genitourinary tract tumors less commonly affect the spinal cord. An important presenting sign is back pain, either of recent onset or old pain that has returned or increased. Pain is present in 97% of all cord compressions, followed in frequency by weakness (76%) and paresthesias (57%) along a bilateral or unilateral dermatomal distribution. Associated bowel and bladder dysfunction is seen in 51% of patients with more advanced disease. A few patients have no history of cancer and pain as the initial presentation.
B. Even when the physical examination does not reveal signs of spinal cord compression, obtain plain radiographs of the painful region to rule out neoplastic involvement. If the plain films are negative, consider nonneoplastic causes (rheumatoid arthritis, aortic aneurysm, spondylosis, herniated disc, spinal tuberculosis, osteoarthritis, osteomyelitis). Proceed with a detailed workup if there is pain with tenderness to percussion over the affected vertebral body, bilateral muscle weakness in the extremities, sensory changes, loss of deep tendon reflexes, or bowel or bladder incontinence.
C. If plain films reveal a lesion in a painful area, follow with MRI or myelography, which have comparable sensitivity and specificity. Myelography is an invasive procedure that requires technical skill and the use of contrast. MRI is not invasive and helps in detecting intramedullary lesions, but patients may have difficulty lying still on the hard table or may have claustrophobia. Also, MRI is not always available. If these studies show a lesion, there is a 90% probability of cord compression.
D. If MRI is negative and clinical findings suggest cord involvement, proceed with myelography. Myelography helps determine the upper and lower extent of the lesion and ascertains whether there is more than one lesion. If a complete block is found on lumbar myelography, cisternal myelography or MRI is required to identify the upper end of the block. If both studies are negative, there is no cord compression.
E. The choice of treatment depends on the type of tumor, the level of the block, the rapidity of onset and duration of symptoms, previous treatment, and the clinical experience available. This medical emergency is treated vigorously with radiation or surgery in addition to steroids. Our current recommendation is to give 10 mg IV dexamethasone immediately, follow with 4 mg every 6 hours daily for at least 72 hours, and then rapidly taper as tolerated. Begin radiotherapy immediately after the diagnosis is established. The earlier a lesion is detected and treated, the better the functional outcome. Response rates are 30%-80%. The total dose of radiation is 3000–4000 Gy delivered over 2–4 weeks.
F. Consider surgery (laminectomy, stabilization) when there is (1) no histologic diagnosis and cord compression is the presenting sign of cancer, (2) history of radiation therapy to the affected area, (3) neurologic progression of disease despite steroids and radiotherapy, (4) instability requiring fixation, or (5) a high cervical lesion. Some more recent articles have reported improved outcomes with surgery followed by radiotherapy. This is a consideration especially in patients who are expected to have longer life expectancy and are in general good physical condition to tolerate such a procedure. After surgery, give radiotherapy to avoid recurrences. Initial response to combined surgery and radiation is 20%-100%, depending on tumor type and timing of treatment. The best prognostic index for eventual recovery of function is pretreatment status: 60% of patients who are ambulatory at diagnosis remain so postoperatively, whereas only 7% of those who are paraplegic at diagnosis are ambulatory after treatment.
G. When plain films are negative and physical examination is not definitive, adjust pain medications and observe. If pain persists or worsens or if the history is highly suspicious, perform MRI and proceed accordingly.

