Staphylococcus aureus is a common and dangerous cause of bacteremia. S. aureus bacteremia is increasingly frequent in hospital, health care-associated (e.g., dialysis centers), and community settings. Advances in medical care are implicated in this change in epidemiology. Indwelling vascular catheters, orthopedic hardware, and implanted devices such as pacemakers increase the likelihood of S. aureus bacteremia. The increasing incidence of methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) complicates treatment.

A. S. aureus is capable of causing extensive destruction of normal tissues such as cardiac valves. S. aureus is also particularly prone to metastasize from the original site of infection. Metastatic complications include osteomyelitis, pneumonia, septic arthritis, deep visceral abscesses, and endocarditis. These complications may be occult; however, failure to identify them predisposes to treatment failure. Consequently, a concerted search for endocarditis and metastatic sites of infection is essential. Clinical parameters predictive of complicated bacteremia include positive follow-up blood cultures at 48-96 hours, community acquisition, skin findings suggestive of acute systemic infection, and persistent fever at 72 hours. Even in the absence of any of these risk factors, however, the risk of complication from S. aureus bacteremia was 16% in one prospective study. Echocardiography is recommended in most cases to evaluate for endocarditis-the classic stigmata of this condition cannot be relied on to exclude the diagnosis because they are often absent. However, infectious disease consultation is recommended for complicated bacteremia, particularly endocarditis.
B. All vascular catheters must be removed. Although there have been a few reports of success “treating through” infected catheters, the risk of treatment failure is very high. Repeat blood cultures should be drawn in 24-48 hours. Persistently positive blood cultures or signs of clinical failure such as persistent fever or septic shock suggest complicated bacteremia and warrant transesophageal echocardiography to exclude infective endocarditis. Transthoracic echocardiography is useful if positive but can miss one fourth or more of cases of endocarditis. Patients with negative follow-up blood cultures, clinical improvement, and no indwelling devices (valves, hardware, pacemakers, etc.) should be treated for a minimum of 14 days. Because occult infectious foci are common and can have devastating consequences, use caution and err on the side of longer treatment if in doubt about whether there is complicated bacteremia.
C. Strive to identify an eradicable focus of infection because removing foci is vital for successful treatment and decreases mortality. The absence of a known primary focus is associated with an increased probability of endocarditis. Patients with prosthetic devices or hardware should be treated as if that device has been seeded. Obtain appropriate imaging studies to assess for drainable metastatic complications. If identified, it is often uncertain whether these are the cause or the result of the bacteremia. In either case, a prolonged course of at least 4-6 weeks of IV antibiotics is recommended.
D. For deep foci, such as visceral abscess, osteomyelitis, septic arthritis, or infected prosthetic devices, surgical drainage is recommended. Infected prosthetic devices must be removed. Treat with appropriate parenteral antibiotics for 4-6 weeks.
E. Antibiotic selection requires consideration of the possibility of MRSA. Although antistaphylococcal penicillins (e.g., nafcillin) remain the parenteral drug of choice for methicillin-susceptible S. aureus, the prevalence of MRSA is increasing rapidly. Initial therapy for known or suspected MRSA bacteremia is vancomycin. Alternatives in cases of vancomycin intolerance or allergy include quinupristin-dalfopristin, daptomycin, and linezolid. The use of aminoglycosides for "synergy" for the first 3-5 days of treatment may decrease the time required for clearance of bacteremia but does not improve the rate of cure or mortality and is not routinely recommended.
F. If treatment fails or relapse occurs, suspect occult endocarditis or metastatic focus of infection. Pursue a careful history and examination to identify areas of possible occult foci, paying particular attention to any prosthetic matter in the body. Transesophageal echocardiography and diagnostic imaging of all suspect areas of the body should be performed. Infected foreign devices should be removed and abscesses should be drained. Antibiotic therapy should be optimized by switching to nafcillin whenever possible or by maximizing the dose of vancomycin. Tight glucose control and minimization of immunosuppressants such as corticosteroids can also be beneficial. Addition of a second antistaphylococcal agent can also be considered. Infectious disease consultation is advised.

