Stridor, an audible high-pitched sound with respiration, is a common but serious symptom that requires immediate medical evaluation. It occurs when air is forced through a narrowed airway lumen. In general, narrowing superior to the vocal cords leads to inspiratory stridor, whereas narrowing below the vocal cords produces either expiratory or mixed stridor. Although much attention has been focused on the phase of stridor, the onset of symptoms also provides a useful approach to the management and differential diagnosis.

A. Patients who present with stridor should be triaged as having acute or chronic disease. The clinician should assess whether the symptoms occur with inspiration, expiration, or both and perform a focused history and physical examination. In patients who are stable, imaging can help characterize the airway lesion. The most important initial element of management is ensuring that the patient maintain a safe and patent airway.
B. Acute upper airway obstruction resulting in stridor classically presents with the sudden onset of dyspnea and respiratory distress. These patients should be brought immediately to the emergency department. Because of concern for impending airway closure, treatment for presumed anaphylaxis and laryngeal edema with epinephrine is appropriate in patients with acute stridor.
C. Laryngeal edema most often presents in cases of anaphylaxis or inhalational injuries. In anaphylaxis, a history of exposure to a known offending agent should be sought. Examination should include evaluation for swelling of the lips, tongue, or eyes and an urticarial rash. Rarely, patients will give a history of a hereditary form of angioedema from Cl esterase gene mutations. Thermal injury after smoke inhalation can cause delayed onset of airway edema, and patients require close ongoing monitoring for signs of distress.
D. Infection is another common cause of acute stridor. Although epiglottitis is the most concerning potential infection, the clinician should also consider bacterial tracheitis and retropharyngeal or peritonsillar abscess. Before widespread flu immunization, epiglottitis was a disease of childhood, but it is now increasingly recognized in adults. Adults present with fever, neck pain, and odynophagia and, as a late finding, stridor. If the stridor is subacute, lateral radiographs of the neck may be obtained and classically reveal swelling of the epiglottis (the so-called thumb sign), uvula, and prevertebral soft tissues. Epiglottitis can be a life-threatening condition requiring urgent tracheotomy in as many as 15% of adults; some series report a mortality rate as high as 7%.
E. Foreign body aspiration, although typically seen in children, can also occur in adults as a result of accidental inhalation or bulbar dysfunction as in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), Parkinson's disease, or other neurologic diseases.
F. In the event of respiratory decompensation in the setting of acute stridor, a fiberoptic intubation in the hands of the most experienced operator is preferred, with backup in place for a surgical tracheotomy.
G. The clinician should consider a unique differential diagnosis for patients who present with subacute or chronic stridor. The first concern is for structural abnormalities in the upper airway resulting from neoplasms, benign cysts, or goiter. Additionally, tracheal stenosis can be seen resulting from protracted intubation with balloon cuff injury or in cases of severe gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). Vocal cord dysfunction with involuntary adduction of the cords will also produce intermittent stridor. More rarely, rheumatoid arthritis results in cricoarytenoid disease and subsequent stridor.
H. As part of the initial workup, flow-volume loops obtained by spirometry can suggest whether there is a fixed or variable obstruction and whether the obstruction is intrathoracic or extrathoracic in location. Most clinicians obtain a chest radiograph, although a CT scan with reconstructions of the airway highlights the nature and extent of the lesion more completely. Direct visualization with laryngoscopy in the hands of an otolaryngologist, or bronchoscopy by a pulmonologist, remains the gold standard and also allows for potential intervention.

