In the United States the total number of sudden cardiac death cases is estimated to exceed 300,000 annually. In the developing countries cardiovascular disease is the most common cause of natural death, with 50% of deaths occurring suddenly. Coronary artery disease is the most commonly documented etiology of events. Causative lesions have been demonstrated posthumously in up to 90% of victims of sudden cardiac death. Sudden cardiac death is the initial and only presentation in 20% of deaths related to coronary disease.
Other causes of sudden cardiac death include idiopathic-dilated cardiomyopathy, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, left ventricular hypertrophy, long QT syndrome (congenital or acquired), arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy, Brugada syndrome, myocarditis, and congenital coronary artery anomalies. Nonarrhythmic and noncardiac causes simulating sudden cardiac death include rupture of aortic aneurysm, intracerebral hemorrhage, pulmonary embolism (PE), and prosthetic valve dysfunction.
The care of the patient successfully resuscitated after cardiac arrest should focus on timely evaluation for coronary artery disease with cardiac catheterization if there are no neurologic contraindications. ECG, echocardiography, and family history are essential adjuncts. Recognition of familial syndromes is essential, not only for the presenting patient, but also for screening of extended family.
Survivors of sudden cardiac death should receive implantable defibrillator therapy for secondary prevention if no clear reversible cause is found, and selected patients with correctable ischemia should also receive implants for protection against future events.
The documented initial rhythm in sudden cardiac death is dependent on the time elapsed between the collapse and the first electrocardiographic recording. In a study that included patients wearing Holter monitors at the time of an arrest, the initial rhythm was ventricular fibrillation (VF) or ventricular tachycardia (VT) in 83% of cases, whereas bradyarrhythmias occurred in the remaining 17%. In another study, in which the time to evaluation was <4 minutes, VF was present in 95% of patients, with asystole in 5%. When the time to resuscitation was 12-15 minutes, VF was recorded in 71% and asystole in 21%.
Survival to hospital discharge following resuscitated sudden cardiac death is highly dependent on the initially documented rhythm. Survivor rates are highest for VT, with two thirds of patients surviving, followed closely by VF, but rates are close to zero when the presenting scenario is asystole or electromechanical dissociation. Thus a patient's chance of surviving cardiac arrest is related both to the presenting arrhythmia and to the time elapsed from the collapse to the initiation of resuscitation. For each minute of continued VF, the odds of survival decrease by 7%-10%.
Other factors that influence the likelihood of survival include the time of initiation of CPR and the time of initiation of Advanced Cardiac Life Support (ACLS) by trained personnel with defibrillation combined with drug therapy. Thus the Emergency Cardiovascular Care (ECC) guidelines published by the American Heart Association (AHA) stress the “chain of survival” concept to maximize the likelihood of successful resuscitation:
1. Early access: A bystander recognizes an arrest and alerts EMS
2. Early CPR: Initiation of effective CPR by a bystander
3. Early defibrillation: Ideally delivered within 1–2 minutes of VF onset to restore a perfusing rhythm by the emergency medical services (EMS) team or a bystander with an automated external defibrillator (AED)
4. Early ACLS: Trained personnel (physician in emergency department or in an ambulance or a paramedic) providing defibrillation, intubation, IV fluids, and antiarrhythmic medications
To maximize the likelihood of survival of a patient with sudden cardiac death, AHA promotes the awareness of cardiovascular health and provides the unified Basic Life Support (BLS) training protocols for the general public. Paramedics and medical personnel are further trained in ACLS delivery protocols adopted throughout North America. A summary of the AHA Emergency Cardiac Care algorithm follows. It is not intended as a replacement for the comprehensive ACLS training course, nor is it meant to replace the need for refresher courses. Our intention is to provide a quick memory guide for those already familiar with ACLS skills.
The algorithm illustrates the sequence that is appropriate in most instances of a cardiac arrest and is organized around the steps of the primary and secondary survey. Appropriate actions, ongoing information gathering, consideration of the possible underlying causes, and teamwork are key to the successful outcome of the resuscitation process.