The modern clinical laboratory offers several tests of thyroid function. The physician must be aware of the diagnostic accuracy and limitations of these tests. Abnormal test results must be interpreted with good clinical judgment. Thyroid function tests are probably not cost-effective as routine screens for thyroid disease.

Sensitive Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone (sTSH): A very useful test. Immunometric assays for TSH were introduced in the early 1980s. These assays generally make it possible to distinguish hyperthyroid from euthyroid patients. The sTSH is elevated in hypothyroidism. The sTSH assay has virtually no cross-reactivity with luteinizing hormone (LH), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), and human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG). The normal range for an sTSH assay is about 0.4–6.2 μU/ml.
Free Thyroxine Index (FTI): A useful calculation may soon be obsolete as new immunoassays for free thyroxine (FT4) become available:
FTI = total T4 × T3 Resin Uptake
This calculation “corrects” the total T4 for protein-binding abnormalities. In general, the FTI is a good estimate of free thyroid hormone concentration, although serum TSH is a better indicator of the total body thyroid status.
Free Thyroxine (FT4): FT4 is the amount of non-protein-bound circulating thyroxine (about 0.03%). Previously, measurement of FT4 was difficult and time-consuming (equilibrium dialysis). Two-step immunoassays are now available to measure FT4 quickly and accurately and probably will replace the calculated FTI.
Triiodothyronine by RIA (T3 RIA): Measures total T3. Useful only in diagnosing T3 toxicosis.
Thyroid Antimicrosomal (TMab) and Antithyroglobulin (TgAb) Antibodies: These antibodies may be elevated in Graves' disease and Hashimoto's thyroiditis. A patient may have Hashimoto's thyroiditis and no circulating antibodies. Positive antibodies also are found in portions of the general population and in patients with nonthyroidal illness.
24-Hour Radioactive Iodine Uptake (RAIU): Measures the thyroid's ability to metabolize iodine. The test uses a tracer amount of 123I or 131I given orally. A gamma scintillation counter is used to measure the radioactivity over the thyroid at 4-6 hours and 24 hours after the dose. Normal percentage uptake varies widely. By itself, this test is not a very accurate test of thyroid function, but it is used frequently in the diagnostic evaluation of patients with hyperthyroidism.
Thyroid Imaging-Radionuclide Scan (123I or 99mTc pertechnetate): Does not produce a picture like a CT or MRI scan. Can provide information about gland/lobe contour. Identifies thyroid nodules as “hot” (functioning), “cold” (nonfunctioning), or “warm.”

Clinically apparent hypothyroidism affects about 2% of adult women and about 0.2% of adult men. Primary hypothyroidism refers to intrinsic thyroid failure and accounts for 99% of cases; secondary hypothyroidism refers to hypothyroidism that results from pituitary dysfunction.

A. Patients with hypothyroidism may present with a variety of nonspecific symptoms. Some of the most common features include dry skin, cold intolerance, weight gain, constipation, and fatigue. The clinical picture of hypothyroidism is now a good deal milder because thyrotropin screening became more common. The most common signs in patients with moderate to severe hypothyroidism include bradycardia, delayed ankle reflexes, periorbital puffiness, and coarse hair. The term myxedema refers to the appearance of the skin and subcutaneous tissues in a patient with severe hypothyroidism.
B. The most common cause of primary hypothyroidism in iodine-sufficient areas is chronic autoimmune (Hashimoto's) thyroiditis. This is most common among older women and is generally permanent. Thyroidectomy, radioiodine treatment, and external radiation therapy are other frequent causes of hypothyroidism. Both iodine deficiency and excess can cause hypothyroidism. Iodine deficiency is a type of hypothyroidism associated with goiter. It is the most common cause of hypothyroidism worldwide but is uncommon in the United States, where iodine is added to salt. Acute administration of iodine suppresses thyroxine (T4) synthesis; however, patients recover their thyroid function after just a few days of treatment. Other drugs that cause hypothyroidism include antithyroid medications (e.g., methimazole, propylthiouracil), amiodarone, lithium, and interferon-a.
C. Thyrotropin (or thyroid-stimulating hormone [TSH]) is the most sensitive marker of thyroid function. Patients with a TSH level of >10 μU/L should be treated with replacement T4 with a target TSH of between 1 and 2 μU/L. Levothyroxine has a long half-life, and once-daily treatment results in a nearly constant serum T4 level. As a result of variations in the T4 content of individual formulations, reassessment of the adequacy of replacement is indicated if the formulation is changed. The mean replacement dose of T4 is 1.6-1.8 µg/kg (75–112 µg/day in women and 125–200 µg/day in men). A lower dosage should be initiated in the elderly and titrated. Patients who are obese require doses that are approximately 20% higher. Drugs that interfere with the absorption of levothyroxine include cholestyramine, calcium carbonate, and ferrous sulfate. Patients receiving estrogen replacement also require a higher dosage of levothyroxine.
Combination replacement of liothyronine and levothyroxine is requested by some patients but is not supported by the balance of clinical trial data. If instituted, 25 µg of levothyroxine can be replaced with 5 µg of liothyronine. Desiccated thyroid, liothyronine alone, and other thyroid preparations are not recommended.
D. Patients with a TSH of 5-10 μU/L with a low free T4 level should be treated with replacement levothyroxine. Patients with a TSH of 5–10 μU/L with a normal (T4) level are most likely to have subclinical hypothyroidism. Testing for the presence of thyroid peroxidase antibody can be helpful in such patients because it predicts the progression to permanent hypothyroidism. These patients should be monitored for the development of more severe hypothyroidism, or levothyroxine can be initiated at the outset.
Hypothyroidism can be transient when related to thyroiditis. Inflammation of the thyroid gland can be painful or entirely painless. Hypothyroidism occurring postpartum is one of the most common presentations of thyroiditis. Transient hypothyroidism lasts as long as 6 months, but the hypothyroidism will have resolved in a significant majority of patients within 3 months. Transient hypothyroidism can be difficult to distinguish from Hashimoto's thyroiditis. It is reasonable to attempt to reduce the dosage of levothyroxine by 50% after approximately 3 months in patients who are suspected to have had transient hypothyroidism. If the TSH measured 6 weeks later rises, then the initial dosage is reinstated; if the TSH is stable, then T4 can be withdrawn and the TSH checked again.
E. Central hypothyroidism should be suspected if the TSH is normal or low and the T4 level is low. These patients should have their T4 dose titrated to the level of free T4. Patients receiving high-dose salicylates or phenytoin appear to have low TSH levels as a result of an assay artifact.
F. Levothyroxine requirements increase as early as the fifth week of gestation. Given the importance of maternal euthyroidism for normal fetal cognitive development, women with hypothyroidism should have their levothyroxine dosage increased by approximately 30% as soon as pregnancy is confirmed. Thereafter, serum thyrotropin levels should be monitored and the levothyroxine dosage should be adjusted accordingly.

