Many patients present with a red eye to an emergency department or their primary care physician. It is important to determine which cases need ophthalmology referral and which cases can be managed by the primary care physician. A thorough ocular and systemic history is extremely helpful in making this decision. Key questions include loss of vision, presence of deep versus superficial pain, trauma, history of angle-closure glaucoma, uveitis or systemic illness, and recent ocular history such as surgery. Physical examination also is important. It is essential in all patients with ocular complaints to check visual acuity. Many patients with tearing or discharge note blurred vision, but they can improve it by blinking. If patients have forgotten their glasses, using a pinhole to check vision will compensate for uncorrected refractive error. Patients with deep pain, truly decreased vision, severe perilimbal injection, corneal opacification, and recent ocular surgery all need ophthalmology evaluation. See the algorithm for details on timing.
A. Orbital cellulitis presents with lid erythema, proptosis, and restricted eye movements. The lid may look ptotic (pseudoptosis) secondary to the swelling. The patient also may give a history of sinusitis. In children orbital cellulitis may easily spread from nasal preseptal cellulitis. These patients need to be admitted for IV antibiotics. Some patients may have a real ptosis and a red eye. The examiner needs to look further for cranial nerve palsies. Orbital congestion secondary to a cavernous sinus thrombosis will present with a red, congested eye and an isolated or combined III, IV, or VI nerve palsy. A VII nerve palsy may cause a red eye secondary to poor lid function causing chronic exposure.
B. A history of thyroid abnormalities, lid retraction, proptosis, and injection over the rectus muscles may indicate Graves' orbitopathy. These patients require a thyroid workup and an ophthalmic evaluation to determine optic nerve involvement on a semiurgent basis.
C. Scleritis presents as a severe, deep pain similar to a toothache. If left undiagnosed and untreated, it can have significant visual morbidity. The globe is tender to touch. The sclera appears violaceous in sunlight because of involvement of the deep episcleral vessels. The redness may be either focal or diffuse. It often is associated with systemic immunologic disease. Semi-urgent referral is required.
D. Acute angle-closure glaucoma presents with a red eye, decreased vision, eye pain, headache, a mid-dilated pupil, and corneal edema. The patient may be able to give a history of prior episodes. Immediate (within 1–2 hours) referral to an ophthalmologist is indicated.
E. If the patient has injection primarily around the cornea (ciliary flush), decreased vision, and a small pupil compared with the contralateral eye, the patient may have an anterior uveitis (iritis). Inquire about other systemic symptoms such as arthritis, back pain, and coexisting medical conditions such as ulcerative colitis. These patients need referral for proper diagnosis and treatment on a semiurgent basis (within 24 hours).
F. If the cornea has a white opacity, the patient may have a corneal ulcer, which should be referred to an ophthalmologist urgently for cultures and intensive treatment. Herpes simplex keratitis also may present with a dendritic figure that will highlight with fluorescein, with an underlying clear cornea.
G. A hypopyon is layered WBCs in the anterior chamber and may indicate an infection throughout the eye (endophthalmitis) or may be secondary to a corneal ulcer. The patient may give a history of recent ophthalmic surgery or trauma. This requires immediate referral for cultures and proper treatment.
H. It is essential to examine the anterior chamber in a patient with a red eye. Layered blood in the anterior chamber (hyphema) may also be associated with a flat or shallow anterior chamber, a possible sign of a ruptured globe, requiring immediate referral. A hyphema with a well-formed chamber and no other signs of a ruptured globe should be referred that day.
I. A patient with a red eye, decreased vision, and no other obvious signs may have a retinitis, vitreitis, or posterior scleritis. These are rare causes of a red eye. Refer these patients to an ophthalmologist on a semiurgent basis.
J. If the patient was working with metal or wood, inspect the eye for a foreign body. Irrigating the eye with normal saline may help remove a foreign body. Removal of a conjunctival foreign body may be attempted by rolling a cotton swab over it. A patient with an embedded corneal foreign body that does not irrigate out should be referred to an ophthalmologist within 24 hours for removal. Start the patient on topical antibiotics to prevent infection. If there is a residual rust ring, the patient should follow up with an ophthalmologist in 24–48 hours for removal. If the vision is significantly decreased or there is a question of a globe laceration from the foreign body, urgent referral is necessary.
K. Exposure to chemicals warrants immediate copious saline irrigation (500 ml). If the chemical injury is mild and characterized by mild injection without fluorescein uptake, start topical antibiotics and follow up in 1–2 days. If the chemical injury is severe with corneal clouding and loss of conjunctival blood vessels (porcelain sclera), the patient should be seen by an ophthalmologist immediately.
L. Corneal abrasions present with a severe foreign body sensation, and on Wood's lamp examination they show fluorescein uptake in an otherwise clear cornea. Treatment consists of topical antibiotic ointment and patching. Recheck these patients in 24 hours; if not dramatically improved, refer them to an ophthalmologist.
M. Blepharitis is an inflammation of the eyelids characterized by redness of the eyelids, crusting, and foreign body sensation. The treatment is warm compresses and lid hygiene. Acne rosacea can cause a secondary blepharitis, which should be treated with oral tetracycline or doxycycline. A hordeolum (stye) or chalazion should also be treated with warm compresses and topical antibiotic ointment. Chalazia need to be incised and drained only if they do not respond to a 2-week course of medical therapy.
N. The most common cause of conjunctivitis is a viral infection. The eyes are diffusely red with a watery discharge. Many patients have a preauricular lymph node on the affected side. Treatment is palliative; cool compresses and astringent drops are used because the condition is self-limited. The patient should follow up on a routine basis if the condition does not resolve in 1 week to 10 days.
O. Allergic conjunctivitis is typically seasonal and always presents with itching and occasionally with mild foreign body sensation. Topical antihistamine and/or mast cell stabilizing drops relieve the symptoms. Follow-up is indicated only if symptomatic treatment is ineffective.
P. Bacterial conjunctivitis comprises <5% of all conjunctivitis. Sight-threatening disease can occur with a virulent bacterial species such as gonococcus. Usually the onset is hyperacute (<24 hours) with a fulminant mucopurulent discharge and requires urgent workup with cultures/Gram stain. Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Chlamydia are other common pathogens and present as a less purulent conjunctivitis. The appropriate topical and, in severe cases, systemic antibiotic is based on results of the Gram stain/culture. Initially, use a broad-spectrum antibiotic, altering therapy according to culture results if the conjunctivitis does not respond to initial therapy. Patients who develop corneal or scleral thinning require urgent referral to an ophthalmologist.
Q. Nonspecific conjunctivitis results from mild inflammation of the ocular surface and can be treated with a topical antihistamine or mild topical antibiotic.
R. A pterygium is a fibrovascular growth that extends onto the nasal portion of the cornea. It can sometimes become inflamed or may grow slowly over the pupil (taking months to years). If it extends into the central cornea, reducing the patient's vision, excision is necessary. Pingueculae are degenerative lesions of the bulbar conjunctiva that do not extend onto the cornea. They occur secondary to ultraviolet light exposure. They usually are nasal in location and are yellow-white in appearance. They are benign. If they become inflamed, artificial tears are helpful. Routine follow-up is indicated only if symptoms persist.
S. A subconjunctival hemorrhage consists of blood trapped under the conjunctiva. It can occur with any injury to the globe or with Valsalva's maneuvers. It usually is benign; however, a history of trauma with a flat anterior chamber requires an ophthalmic evaluation on an urgent basis. If a patient has recurring subconjunctival hemorrhage with no known cause, a workup for a hematologic disorder is indicated. Episcleritis is localized inflammation of the episcleral blood vessels that responds to topical steroids. Be certain that the patient does not have herpetic keratitis before starting treatment.

