Toxic shock syndromes are rare but life-threatening infectious syndromes characterized by fever, hypotension, and multisystem organ failure. They were first described in 1978 in a case series of young women who became critically ill with fever, rash, and hypotension soon after onset of menstruation. The syndrome was linked to the use of highly absorbent tampons colonized with a toxin-producing strain of Staphylococcus aureus. In subsequent years, similar syndromes have been traced to extravaginal infections with S. aureus, severe skin and soft-tissue infections with Streptococcus pyogenes, and rarely with other bacteria. Approximately one third of cases of toxic shock syndrome are now associated with postpartum and post-surgical wound infections, but cases have been reported of the syndrome arising after infection of virtually any part of the body, including sinusitis, arthritis, osteomyelitis, and respiratory infections.

The syndrome is caused by elaboration of toxins by bacteria colonizing or infecting the body. Both Staphylococcus and Streptococcus are capable of producing so-called superantigens that can rapidly activate massive numbers of T cells at once. The clinical manifestations of toxic shock syndrome are secondary to cytokine storms precipitated by the activated T cells or directly by the toxins themselves.

A. In patients with fever and hypotension an infectious syndrome should be highly suspected and assiduously sought. The presence of a diffuse erythroderma resembling a total body sunburn in a patient who has rapidly become very ill is highly suggestive of a toxic shock syndrome, particularly that caused by S. aureus. Evidence of other organ dysfunction, including confusion, profuse diarrhea, severe myalgias, elevated liver enzymes, and thrombocytopenia, confirms the diagnosis. The rash classically desquamates but only 1–3 weeks after presentation; hence, this feature is not helpful for initial diagnosis. The formal case definition for staphylococcal toxic shock syndrome (STSS) is given in Table 1. A thorough examination for a locus of infection should follow, including close assessment of any site of recent surgical intervention and a full gynecologic examination to look for retained tampons or contraceptive sponges. Sites of recent surgery should be opened for irrigation and drainage even if the wound does not appear infected because local inflammatory responses can be blunted in STSS. Any foreign material such as nasopharyngeal packing or tampons should be removed. Blood cultures should be drawn, although bacteremia is rarely found in STSS.

B. Purpura and/or petechiae can be found in toxic shock syndrome, but their presence should prompt a search for other severe disease, including meningococcal or pneumococcal meningitis, bacterial sepsis, Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF), dengue, leptospirosis, and DIC. Both meningococcal and pneumococcal meningitis have been associated with adrenal hemorrhage and necrosis leading to hypotension with purpura and/or petechiae. The presence of meningismus helps to make the diagnosis. RMSF is a bacterial infection caused by Rickettsia rickettsiae. It is transmitted by tick bites and is most commonly seen in the southeastern United States. The rash usually first appears on the palms and soles and is accompanied by fever with severe headache. Dengue hemorrhagic fever is a viral illness acquired from mosquito bites predominantly in tropical countries. It is characterized by fever, severe diffuse bone pain, hypotension, and a petechial rash, particularly in parts of the body exposed to pressure (e.g., the skin beneath a blood pressure cuff). Leptospirosis is a severe acute febrile illness caused by the spirochete Leptospira. It is classically acquired by contact with animals or their excretions, particularly from rabbits and rats. Patients complain of fever, chills, headache, myalgias, eye discomfort, and rash. Conjunctival injection, pharyngitis, pulmonary infiltrates, hepatitis, renal dysfunction, and diffuse macular or maculopapular rash can be found on evaluation. DIC is a serious consumptive coagulopathy and hemolytic process that can be precipitated by sepsis, obstetric catastrophe, surgery, pancreatitis, or toxin exposure. It is suggested by laboratory findings of elevated creatinine, prolonged prothrombin time (PT) and partial thromboplastin time (PTT), low fibrinogen, anemia, thrombocytopenia, and the presence of schistocytes on peripheral blood smear.

C. Skin or soft-tissue infection in the presence of fever and hypotension is suggestive of toxic shock syndrome caused by S. pyogenes (group A beta-hemolytic Streptococcus). There is a predilection for these infections to arise from recent surgical wounds. Pulmonary infections, including pneumonia and empyema with S. pyogenes, are also well-described precipitants. Severe pain at the site of infection, particularly pain out of proportion to examination findings, is a classic clue to an evolving streptococcal toxic shock syndrome with associated necrotizing fasciitis. The soft-tissue infection is often rapidly progressive. In contrast to STTS, diffuse body rash is rarely seen, whereas blood cultures are frequently positive.

D. Patients presenting with fever and hypotension in the absence of rash should be evaluated for bacterial sepsis. Particular attention should be directed to any indwelling venous access devices or recently implanted hardware that can act as common loci for infection. If present in an unstable patient, every effort should be made to remove these devices as soon as possible.

E. Treatment of toxic shock syndromes consists of supportive care, antibiotic therapy, rapid surgical debridement, and possibly IV immunoglobulins. Patients with toxic shock syndrome often develop capillary leak syndromes leading to refractory, sustained hypotension. Aggressive fluid repletion and ICU-level management are essential. Initial antibiotic therapy should include clindamycin and vancomycin. Clindamycin is recommended because it impairs bacterial toxin production. It has also been shown to be more active than penicillin-derived products against S. pyogenes in patients with extremely high bacterial burden. Vancomycin should be included in empiric regimens because of the increasing prevalence of methicillin resistance among community and hospital S. aureus isolates. Penicillin can be included if there is a high suspicion that the patient has streptococcal toxic shock syndrome. Rapid, aggressive surgical debridement is essential to decreasing the patient's overall burden of infection. IV immunoglobulins have been shown to be beneficial in streptococcal toxic shock syndrome. If S. aureus is isolated from a patient and shown to be methicillin susceptible, then nafcillin should be substituted for vancomycin because it has superior anti-staphylococcal activity.