Transient monocular blindness (TMB) is a medical emergency. The most common etiologies include embolic disease, hemodynamic changes, primary ocular pathology, or primary neurologic disease other than vascular compromise. If the temporary visual loss is caused by vascular ischemia, whether from embolic disease or hemodynamic changes, it is commonly called amaurosis fugax (AF).

A. Embolic disease: AF typically is described as impairment of vision that begins in the upper field of vision of one eye and progresses to involve the entire visual field of that eye. It usually lasts seconds to minutes. AF may stop with a hemifield loss, ascend, or rarely progress across the visual field laterally. Repeat episodes of AF tend to follow a stereotypical pattern for each patient. Of emboli, 50% are cholesterol plaques, most often originating from the ipsilateral carotid bifurcation or from the distal internal carotid artery. Funduscopy rarely, but diagnostically, reveals a glistening yellow or white object within the retinal vessel (Hollenhorst plaque). Of emboli, 4% may contain fibrin clot and originate from ulcerated vascular plaques or mural cardiac thrombi. Pure calcific emboli are rare and arise exclusively from cardiac valves. An episode of TMB is an indication of increased risk of stroke similar to a hemispheric transient ischemic attack (TIA). Of patients with TMB, 11% later develop strokes; in 41% of those, strokes occur within 1 week of the event. In younger patients with history of trauma or neck manipulations who present with TMB, embolic disease or hypoperfusion state from carotid dissection needs to be considered.
B. Temporal arteritis may cause blindness as a result of thrombosis of the central retinal artery as a result of giant cell arteritis. Patients are usually older and complain of visual loss or changes in a setting of headache. They may also have fever, anorexia, and weight loss. Leukocytosis, anemia, and elevated ESR are common. The disease process is self-limited over a period of months. The risk of permanent visual loss from temporal arteritis is approximately 35%, and timely evaluation and treatment with high-dose steroids can prevent further visual loss, although restoration of vision is rare. Migraine may present with unilateral visual changes and headache. Homonymous hemianopsia may be misinterpreted by the patient as a monocular loss of vision. Retinal migraine, a rare diagnosis of exclusion that is truly monocular, is presumed to be a vasospastic event. Positive visual phenomena such as scintillating scotoma or “white-outs” may be seen. Most patients with retinal migraines respond well to calcium channel blockers. In a young individual, transient unilateral loss of central vision associated with pain on eye movement and headache is seen in acute retrobulbar optic neuritis—either as a clinically isolated syndrome or as a manifestation of a known diagnosis of multiple sclerosis. Symptoms of optic neuritis tend to worsen with increased body temperature (Uhthoff's phenomenon). Inflammation and demyelination of the optic nerve are responsible for visual loss. High-dose IV steroids given once daily for 3-5 days shorten the duration of symptoms but seem to have little effect on the degree of visual recovery based on Optic Neuritis Treatment Trial data.
C. Vascular ocular diseases causing anterior ischemic optic neuropathy (AION), occlusion of the central retinal vein, and malignant arterial hypertension sometimes begin with attacks of TMB. AION involves infarction of the anterior portion of the optic nerve that can be visualized with direct ophthalmoscopy. It has recently been described as a rare complication from use of drugs for erectile dysfunction (the PDEF5 inhibitors). Nonvascular causes of TMB include increased intraorbital pressure and congenital anomalies. Subacute attacks of angle-closure glaucoma can present with transient visual loss and should be considered especially if patients complain of halos around lights. This symptom is a result of corneal edema resulting from rapid elevation of intraorbital pressure. Papilledema from any cause can present with visual obscurations. These disorders can be identified with the aid of a careful ophthalmologic examination showing abnormal ocular findings with a normal retina.