Platelets (PLTs) are transfused to prevent or treat bleeding in patients with quantitative or qualitative PLT defects. PLTs are either prepared from a unit of whole blood (random-donor PLT unit, RDP) or are collected by apheresis (single-donor PLT unit, SDP). A pool of four to six RDPs provides about the same total PLT dose as one SDP (≥3 × 1011 PLTs).

A. The vast majority of PLT transfusions are given prophylactically to patients who are not bleeding and who have thrombocytopenia. For years, a PLT count of 20,000/µl was used as a standard PLT transfusion trigger. Later, multiple controlled trials demonstrated that prophylactic PLT transfusions can safely be given using a lower trigger (e.g., 10,000/µl), leading to substantial product inventory and cost savings. A PLT transfusion trigger higher than 10,000/µl is often used for patients with comorbidities (fever, coagulation defects, intracranial lesions, high white cell counts, rapid PLT consumption).
B. A published practice guideline has recommended a PLT count of 50,000/µl for most major surgical procedures, with counts near 100,000/µl recommended for neurosurgical or ophthalmologic procedures. PLT counts of 25,000/µl or so are generally adequate for minor procedures, such as central venous line placement.
C. PLT transfusions are indicated to treat bleeding in the setting of thrombocytopenia or a qualitative platelet abnormality. The goal should be to maintain a PLT count >50,000/μ1.
D. Bleeding in the setting of pharmacologic inhibitors of PLT function (aspirin, clopidogrel, abciximab, etc.) frequently responds to PLT transfusion. In contrast, uremic bleeding tends to respond less well to PLT transfusion because the infused PLTs rapidly acquire the same defect affecting the patient's own PLTs.
E. The response to PLT transfusion is assessed by observing whether bleeding stops and by measuring a posttransfusion PLT count. The expected PLT increment for an average adult receiving an SDP or a pool of RDPs is 30,000–60,000/µl. Although the posttransfusion increment is the usual value considered in routine practice, a more accurate measure of PLT response is provided by the corrected count increment (CCI):
CCI
=
Body surface area (m²) × PLT count increment/µl × 1011
No. of PLTs transfused
A CCI of ≥7500 indicates an adequate PLT response.
F. Platelet refractoriness may be defined as a poor increment following repeated PLT transfusions. Several non-immune factors can cause PLT refractoriness, including medications, fever, sepsis, DIC, bleeding, splenomegaly, and graft-versus-host disease. In a subset of cases, PLT refractoriness is immune mediated. A 10-minute to 1-hour posttransfusion PLT count that fails to show an adequate CCI on more than one occasion usually indicates antibody-mediated PLT destruction (alloimmunization). A recipient panel-reactive antibody (PRA) score of ≥20% provides supporting evidence for the role of anti-human leukocyte antigen (HLA) antibodies.
G. PLTs themselves tend to be poor immunogens. For patients who become alloimmunized, the initial antigenic stimulation generally comes from HLA class I molecules expressed on WBCs. Providing leukoreduced blood products is effective at helping to prevent PLT alloimmunization. Once a patient does become alloimmunized to PLTs, a number of strategies may be considered, including administering HLA-matched or cross-matched PLTs. If the specificity of the recipient antibody can be determined, providing antigen-negative PLT units may also be effective.

