Granulocyte transfusions are sometimes considered for patients with severe neutropenia (absolute neutrophil count [ANC] <500/µl) and a life-threatening bacterial or fungal infection. Cases where granulocyte transfusions are considered are ones in which the patient's own neutrophil counts are expected to recover within a few weeks (e.g., following a chemotherapy-induced nadir). Despite being used for >40 years, the efficacy of granulocyte transfusions remains unclear. Indeed, a multicenter randomized controlled trial of standard antimicrobial therapy, high-dose granulocyte transfusion has recently been proposed to attempt to definitively settle the question of what (if any) role granulocytes have in treating neutropenic sepsis. In the 1970s and early 1980s, seven randomized controlled studies were performed to assess the efficacy of granulocytes. Three trials reported positive results, two trials reported partial positive results, and two trials reported negative results. All these studies were criticized for several reasons, including administration of insufficient granulocyte doses, small patient sample sizes, and excessively high mortality rates observed among the control patients. In the mid-1980s, granulocyte transfusion use fell sharply because the clinical results seen were marginal, there was concern over adverse reactions, and there were marked improvements in antimicrobial agents. Interest in granulocyte transfusions was renewed in the 1990s, when the introduction of recombinant granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) permitted the collection of extremely high doses of granulocytes.
A. Granulocytes are collected by apheresis from healthy donors, either volunteer community apheresis platelet donors, or friends or family members of the patient. To increase the granulocyte yield, donors may be mobilized with a single dose of G-CSF approximately 12 hours before granulocyte collection. G-CSF mobilization permits the harvest of 4–8 × 1010 granulocytes. Corticosteroids (e.g., oral dexamethasone) have been shown to increase the granulocyte yield even further. In general, granulocyte mobilization of donors has been reported to be well tolerated, but there are known risks associated with both G-CSF and corticosteroid administration.
B. Granulocyte products are stored at room temperature and must be transfused within 24 hours of collection. Because granulocyte products may contain 40–50 ml of RBCs, they must be ABO compatible with the recipient. All granulocyte products must be irradiated to prevent transfusion-associated graft-versus-host disease. Generally, patients who are negative for cytomegalovirus (CMV) only receive granulocytes from donors who are CMV negative.
C. Adverse reactions to granulocytes are seen in about 10% of granulocyte transfusions. Typical reactions are fever/chills or mild allergic reactions (itching/hives). More rarely, serious reactions are seen, such as anaphylaxis or acute lung injury. Hypoxic reactions have been reported to be associated with the administration of amphotericin, so granulocyte transfusions are typically given several hours apart from doses of amphotericin. Finally, granulocyte products carry the same infectious risks of other blood products. Because granulocytes must be given within 24 hours of collection, infectious disease testing is not available prior to the time of administration. Ordinarily, the granulocyte donor is tested and documented to be negative for all standard infectious disease markers up to 30 days ahead of the granulocyte donation.

