Transient ischemic attacks (TIAs) are classically defined as brief episodes of focal neurologic deficits, usually lasting <24 hours and affecting cerebral blood flow. They are generally thought not to cause permanent damage to the brain. However, TIAs lasting more than 1 hour are associated with brain tissue damage in up to 50% of all cases. Although the definition remains controversial, TIAs continue to be an important indicator and prognosticator of cerebrovascular and cardiovascular disease. Because the risk of stroke can be as high as 20% within the first 3 months after a TIA and about 5% within 48 hours, early workup to identify the specific etiology and prompt intervention are crucial for stroke prophylaxis.

A. Focal neurologic deficits occur in a number of conditions other than vascular ischemic events. Vascular events have an abrupt onset; the maximal effect is usually seen within minutes. The subacute development of focal neurologic deficits is typically seen in conditions such as subdural hematoma, demyelinating disorders, brain abscesses, mass lesions, and venous sinus thrombosis. Occasionally, these pathologies present with transient deficits, but more commonly persistent abnormalities remain. A focal seizure or migraine may present with transient focal neurologic deficits but is usually accompanied by other symptoms. Involuntary movements, loss of consciousness, incontinence, or confusion suggests a seizure. Visual scintillations or headache may accompany transient episodes in patients with migraine.
B. The primary cause of TIAs is neural tissue ischemia from lack of blood flow. Ischemic etiologies of TIA include large vessel (e.g., carotid or vertebral-basilar stenosis), small vessel (e.g., hypertensive lacunar infarcts), embolic (e.g., cardiac, artery-to-artery, or paradoxical emboli via patent foramen ovale), and other (e.g., trauma-related dissection, vasculitis). The workup to determine the specific pathophysiologic mechanism underlying a TIA is crucial because treatment options differ.
C. The pattern of neurologic deficits indicates the vascular territory involved. Carotid artery ischemia (anterior circulation) can cause blindness (amaurosis fugax) on the ipsilateral (same side) of the affected artery and weakness or sensory loss on the contralateral face, arm, and leg. Aphasia (trouble with speech), including difficulty finding words or understanding others, may be present. In the posterior circulation, ischemia involving the brainstem is common and may cause a constellation of symptoms, including ataxia, dysarthria, diplopia, and facial weakness.
D. Vertebrobasilar TIAs (posterior circulation), which can more easily be missed, may involve a combination of gait or balance problems (ataxia), double vision (diplopia), vertigo, slurred speech (dysarthria), binocular blindness, swallowing difficulty (dysphagia), sleepiness, and varying patterns of limb weakness.

E. In patients <45 years old, consider toxic screen, attention to history of trauma to look for carotid/vertebral dissection, transthoracic echo with bubble study to look for patent foramen ovale, or hypercoagulable panel (especially in women taking oral contraceptives to look for venous disease).