Tremor results from involuntary, alternating, rhythmic contractions of agonist and antagonist muscles and is typically classified by the position of the limb in which it is manifest: rest, postural, or action (kinetic). Rate, amplitude, and rhythmicity are also useful descriptors for tremor when considering its potential causes. Although there is overlap in the clinical manifestation of tremor among the various etiologies, it is useful to consider four major categories: parkinsonian, cerebellar, essential, and enhanced physiologic tremor. The categorization of tremor rests primarily on history and neurologic examination.

A. Parkinsonian tremor is characteristically a 3- to 6-Hz rest tremor described as “pill-rolling.” Associated hypokinetic features of rigidity, bradykinesia, and gait and postural instability are seen in idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD). Parkinsonian tremor is less commonly seen in atypical parkinsonian syndromes (also known as Parkinson-plus syndromes), such as multiple-system atrophy and progressive supranuclear palsy. Treatment with levodopa, dopamine agonists, and anticholinergics can alleviate the tremor seen in PD (see also Parkinson's Disease chapter).
B. Cerebellar dysfunction resulting from lesions to the cerebellum or its pathways (by infarcts, mass lesions, demyelination, or degenerative diseases) can result in a large-amplitude, coarse tremor of the limbs (formerly known as rubral tremor) or trunk (known as titubation) that occurs primarily with action or maintenance of a posture. Benzodiazepines and some anti-epileptic medications can alleviate this form of tremor.
C. Essential tremor is a common movement disorder that is manifested by an 8- to 12-Hz postural and/or action tremor typically in the upper extremities that is most often familial and alcohol responsive. Clinical trials have shown that propranolol and primidone are the most effective treatments for essential tremor, but other medications can be useful as can deep brain stimulation in medication-refractory cases.
D. Enhanced physiologic tremor is typically a postural tremor of 8-12 Hz, similar to that of essential tremor. It may result from metabolic disorders (hyperthyroidism, hypoglycemia), drugs (caffeine, lithium, amphetamines), or stress (fatigue, anxiety). Treatment is typically not indicated except to address the underlying cause.