A. Patients with lower urinary tract infection (UTI) or cystitis complain primarily of dysuria. Frequency, nocturia, urgency, and suprapubic tenderness also may be present. About one third of patients with only lower tract symptoms have an occult renal infection. Patients with overt upper tract infection or acute pyelonephritis usually have flank, low back, or abdominal pain; fevers; chills; malaise; and nausea and vomiting. Concomitant lower tract symptoms also may be present.
B. Individuals with pyelonephritis (PN) often can be successfully treated as outpatients. However, patients with nausea and vomiting who are unable to take oral fluids and medications should be hospitalized. Enterobacteriaceae are the most common pathogens associated with acute pyelonephritis. A wide variety of antimicrobial regimens is available. Initial outpatient therapy may include trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole(TMP/SMX), a cephalosporin, or a fluoroquinolone. The conventional IV regimen of ampicillin and gentamicin is effective, although TMP/SMX, fluoroquinolones, and cephalosporins also may be considered. The initial choice of therapy must be based on the most likely organisms present and local susceptibility patterns. Definitive therapy must be guided by results of culture and sensitivity tests.
C. In patients with acute cystitis, certain risk factors increase the chance of an occult renal or complicated UTI. Such risk factors include nosocomial infection, pregnancy, known urinary tract abnormality or stone, indwelling catheter or recent instrumentation, previous relapse after therapy for UTI, previous UTI before 12 years of age, acute PN or more than three UTIs in the past year, symptoms for >7 days before therapy, recent antibiotic use, diabetes, and other immunosuppressing conditions. Treat patients with one or more of these risk factors as having an upper tract infection.
D. In acute, uncomplicated cystitis, 3-day antibiotic therapy can be given without obtaining a culture. Seven-day regimens are effective but are associated with a higher incidence of adverse drug reactions, noncompliance, and increased cost. Highly effective 3-day regimens include TMP/SMX 160 mg/800 mg twice daily, amoxicillin/clavulanate 500 mg/125 mg every 12 hours, ciprofloxacin 250 mg every 12 hours, and norfloxacin 400 mg every 12 hours. Because of widespread Escherichia coli resistance, ampicillin/amoxicillin alone may not be as effective as other regimens. Studies with cephalosporins in 3-day regimens have shown conflicting results. Posttherapy urine cultures are needed only in patients with persisting symptoms, complicating factors, or pregnancy. In patients who are pregnant, or whose pregnancy status is unknown, nitrofurantoin is the preferred agent.
E. Sexual intercourse and use of diaphragms or spermicide use alone have been associated with an increased risk of UTI. Urination after intercourse may reduce the frequency of relapse. Postcoital antibiotic therapy also is effective. Regimens include TMP/SMX 1/2 SS tablet, cephalexin 250 mg, or nitrofurantoin 50 mg within 2 hours after intercourse. Discontinuing use of a diaphragm for contraception also may reduce the frequency of relapse.
F. In patients with dysuria, a positive urine culture is considered to be >10º CFU/ml growth. Treat patients with a positive culture for 7–14 days. In acute cystitis, >90% of cases are caused by E. coli and other Enterobacteriaceae, Staphylococcus saprophyticus, and Enterococcus. Unless a highly resistant pathogen is present, an inexpensive agent, such as TMP/SMX, should be adequate. Reserve more expensive agents, such as the fluoroquinolones, cephalosporins, and amoxicillin/clavulanate, for resistant infections.
G. In patients with frequent recurrences, chronic suppression can reduce this frequency by 95%. Many regimens have been evaluated. If possible, choose the least toxic, least expensive agent. Effective daily regimens include nitrofurantoin 50-100 mg, TMP/SMX 40–80 mg/200-400 mg, and trimethoprim 100 mg. Thrice-weekly administration of TMP/SMX 40 mg/200 mg also has proved effective. Cranberry juice, 300 ml/day, has significantly reduced bacteriuria in postmenopausal women.

