Urinary incontinence is an important health problem and affects 10 million patients to some degree. Approximately 50% of patients in nursing homes are affected by urinary incontinence, and >$15-$20 billion is spent annually on management of this problem. There are four types of urinary incontinence: stress, urge, overflow, and mixed. When approaching a patient with questionable urinary incontinence it is imperative to obtain a thorough history and physical examination. Cystometry may help confirm your clinical suspicion but is not absolute, especially if the urinary symptoms are not reproduced during the study. Treatment differs between each type of urinary incontinence; therefore, it is imperative to make the correct diagnosis.

A. Stress incontinence results from an anatomic defect or weakness in the pelvic floor that results in poor support and hypermobility of the urethra. The sphincteric mechanism itself is intact (usually). The defect arises when the bladder undergoes filling/storage and the intravesical pressure exceeds intraurethral pressure as a result of excessive mobility of the urethra. The stages of stress urinary incontinence ascend from I and II depending on the degree of urethral hypermobility; stage III involves an associated defect in the intrinsic sphincter. Diagnosis starts with the history and physical examination with patients reporting urinary leakage on activities that results in increased intraabdominal pressure. Leakage tends to occur with coughing, sneezing, and/or Valsalva. Information about routine past medical/surgical history, medications, and diet may be useful. As with most patients with urinary symptoms, we recommend sending the serum for basic chemistry if one is not on file and the urine for urinalysis and urine culture to rule out any associated urinary tract infection. Physical examination is important to rule out any associated cystocele, rectocele, or prolapse. Neurologic examination also may be helpful. If there is continued suspicion for stress incontinence, the patient should undergo cystometry, which should include a cystogram and urodynamic analysis. Cystometry will help look at the anatomy and the physiology of both the urethra and sphincteric mechanism. Treatment for stress urinary incontinence is surgical and is centered around restoring the normal integrity of the pelvic floor support. This can be accomplished by the Marshall-Marchetti-Krantz suprapubic approach and the modified Burch procedure, which fixes the anterior vaginal wall to Cooper's ligament. Other techniques include a variety of vaginal suspension procedures that tend to rely on sutures placed paravaginally, which are secured in the suprapubic area and tied over the rectus sheath. Sling procedures have become popular; they use either cadaveric tissues for support or, most commonly, synthetic material. The sling procedures may be used with sphincter damage and combined cystocele repair, depending on the type of system used. Of mention, another less invasive tool in patients not suitable for surgery is the pessary.

B. True urge incontinence is defined as detrusor instability with normal intrinsic sphincter function, no neuropathy, and normal anatomy. As with stress incontinence, history and physical examination supported by cystometry will help elucidate urge urinary incontinence. The patient usually reports inability to hold urine long enough to void in an appropriate place on a repetitive basis. The most common causes of urge incontinence include age, inhibition of neurologic control of micturition (spinal abnormality, stroke), and bladder irritation (infection, inflammation, cancer, hematuria, stones). If urinalysis shows microscopic hematuria, then an evaluation, which should include urine cytology, imaging, and cystoscopy to identify the source of bleeding, should be initiated. Based on urodynamics and pressure/flow studies, one may sometimes find uninhibited detrusor contractions during bladder filling. On the results of the urodynamic study, treatment focuses on decreasing these uninhibited contractions, most commonly with antimuscarinic agents. Side effects differ among different medications, and the physician and patient must tailor which medication and dose provide the best symptomatic relief with the fewest side effects. The final treatment for urge incontinence may include surgery with either sacral nerve modulation or augmentation cystoplasty.

C. Overflow incontinence is not true incontinence and usually results from an obstructive or neuropathic lesion. History and physical examination usually reveal impaired detrusor contraction, bladder outlet obstructive symptoms (decreased force of stream, urgency, terminal dribbling), or both, but also may reveal irritative symptoms (frequency, nocturia, dysuria). Uroflow and postvoid residual will guide the suspicion for bladder outlet obstruction; however, urodynamics will help confirm the diagnosis. Treatment of the underlying cause of the obstruction will treat the overall incontinence. For example, classically the patient will have an enlarged prostate, and treatment for the enlarged prostate (type I alpha blocker and type II 5-alpha reductase inhibitors) will help resolve the overflow incontinence. Agents that decrease bladder contractility should be avoided.

D. Mixed incontinence often involves detrusor overactivity (urgency) associated with urethral hypermobility/urethral intrinsic sphincter dysfunction (stress). History and physical examination supported by cystometry will help elucidate the severity of mixed incontinence and what is likely contributing to the overall incontinence. Treatment is based on the severity and type of symptoms.