Bleeding in pregnancy may have a number of causes, including obstetric, gynecologic, and nongynecologic causes. It is relatively common, complicating up to 5% of term pregnancies. Rapidly determining the cause is of utmost importance to ensure maternal and fetal well-being.

A. Initial management, regardless of gestational age, includes stabilization of the patient followed by thorough history and physical examination, with determination of the amount and rate of bleeding. Once the patient is hemodynamically stable, investigate the cause of the bleeding.
B. Gestational age can be estimated by date of last menstrual period, fundal height, or sonography. The main differential diagnosis for bleeding in early pregnancy is spontaneous abortion (SAb) and ectopic pregnancy. Proceed immediately to speculum examination.
C. SAb is termination of pregnancy before 20 weeks (<500 g). Bleeding in SAb is caused by hemorrhage into the decidua basalis and necrotic changes in the tissue. If when the speculum is placed there is blood in the vagina but the cervical opening (os) is closed, threatened abortion is the diagnosis. About half of women who bleed in the first trimester go on to abort. If the bleeding is associated with pain and cramping, the prognosis is worse. However, if fetal cardiac activity is demonstrated, only 10% proceed to abortion (fetal cardiac activity can be documented by transvaginal ultrasound [US] at 5 weeks). Management is complete pelvic rest; bed rest is not warranted.
D. Bleeding is the most common sign of a molar pregnancy and can be intermittent or continuous, lasting weeks to months. The bleeding usually is brown, rarely bright red. Other signs include uterine size greater than expected for gestational age, intractable nausea and vomiting, highly elevated levels of beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG), or high blood pressure. The diagnosis is confirmed by US, which may show a complete mole or a partial mole with coexisting viable pregnancy. Treatment is evacuation, with serial β-hCG determinations until undetectable, and delaying conception for at least 1 year. Chemotherapy may be required if β-hCG remains elevated.
E. Cervicitis from chlamydial infection or gonorrhea can present with spotting and increased vaginal discharge. On speculum examination there are signs of inflammation and purulent discharge. Vaginitis most commonly is caused by bacterial vaginosis, trichomoniosis, or candidiasis. Vaginitis tends to present with serosanguineous discharge, especially after intercourse. Cervical polyps and cervical cancer also can present with bleeding. On speculum examination, polyps appear to be hanging out of the cervical canal and are smooth, soft, and red to purple. They bleed readily when touched. Cervical cancer often has a cauliflower-like, necrotic appearance. Both cause bleeding after intercourse or vaginal examination.
F. Nongynecologic causes include urinary tract infection, GI bleeding, lymphoma, and thrombocytopenia.
G. If on speculum examination the os is closed and there is no blood in the vagina but fetal cardiac activity is absent on US or fetal Doppler (present after about 10 weeks), a missed abortion has occurred; that is, the fetus has died but has been retained, often for weeks. Management generally is elective evacuation to decrease the risk of sepsis or DIC.
H. In ectopic pregnancy implantation occurs at a site other than the endometrium, most commonly (96%) in the tubes. Bleeding is thought to be the result of the pregnancy outgrowing its blood supply, which leads to declining endocrine function of the placenta, resulting in inadequate endometrial support with subsequent breakthrough bleeding. Bleeding usually is scant and associated with abdominal pain, often unilateral. Diagnosis is made by serial β-hCG determinations and sonography. The B-hCG level doubles every 48 hours in a normal pregnancy. Ectopic pregnancies have impaired production of β-hCG and thus have a prolonged doubling time. Transvaginal US allows visualization of a gestational sac once the β-hCG is >1500 mIU/ml, whereas transabdominal US can detect the sac if β-hCG is >6000 mIU/ml. If no sac is seen in the uterus, ectopic pregnancy is presumed. Treatment is laparoscopic salpingostomy, laparotomy if the patient is hemodynamically unstable, or intramuscular injection of methotrexate if the sac is <4 cm and unruptured. Regardless of treatment modality, β-hCG level is followed until undetectable.
I. If the os is open on speculum examination, inevitable abortion is the diagnosis. Bleeding in an inevitable abortion usually is associated with cramping. Management may be expectant or may consist of evacuation of the products of conception (POC).
L. Vaginal bleeding in the third trimester is an absolute contraindication to pelvic examination until the location of the placenta can be determined. Therefore US must be performed to rule out placenta previa before further examination. Speculum or digital examination in the presence of placenta previa can lead to life-threatening obstetric hemorrhage.
M. Placenta previa is abnormal implantation of the placenta over the cervical os. Complete placenta previa covers the os; partial incompletely covers the os; marginal is directly adjacent to the os. Placenta previa complicates 1 of 200 term pregnancies and usually presents as painless vaginal bleeding. Incidence is increased with advanced maternal age, increased parity, and previous uterine surgery. Management from 24-36 weeks includes stabilization of the patient, fetal monitoring, blood typing and screening, and RhoGAM injection if indicated. Once maternal and fetal well-being are ensured, the patient should remain hospitalized on bed rest with maintenance of hematocrit at 30% in case of future large hemorrhage. Of those, 20% are complicated with uterine activity because blood acts as an irritant. However, cervical dilation cannot be determined directly, so tocolysis may be started empirically.
N. Placental abruption results from premature separation of the placenta before delivery. The cause in most cases is unknown, but there is an association with increased maternal age and parity, abdominal trauma, cocaine use, and smoking. Abruption presents with a clinical triad of bleeding, uterine hyperactivity/hypertonicity, and fetal distress. Diagnosis generally is clinical, although US may support the diagnosis in 50% of cases with evidence of retroplacental clot or other hemorrhage. Maternal complications include shock, DIC, and ischemic necrosis. Therefore, in addition to a hemoglobin, hematocrit, and blood type and screen, evaluation for consumptive coagulopathy should include fibrinogen and fibrin split products, platelets, and prothrombin time/partial thromboplastin time. RhoGAM should be given to the Rh(-) mother. A Kleihauer-Betke test will determine whether >30 ml of fetal blood has entered the maternal circulation, necessitating additional RhoGAM therapy in the Rh(-) mother.
O. Rupture of a fetal blood vessel is a rare occurrence that can happen in association with a velamentous insertion of the umbilical cord. Fetal monitoring shows signs of fetal distress, most often alternating fetal tachycardia-bradycardia as the fetus attempts to compensate for acute blood loss.
P. In preterm labor with cervical dilation, cervical change can cause spotting secondary to dilation and effacement. Other symptoms include pelvic pressure, vaginal discharge, and backache, with or without frank contractions. Rule out premature rupture of membranes with sterile speculum examination looking for pooling of amniotic fluid in the vagina, positive Nitrazine test, and ferning. If gestation is 34 weeks, management includes betamethasone injection for fetal lung maturity, antibiotic prophylaxis for group B streptococcus, and tocolysis. If <34 weeks, expectant management with bed rest and pelvic rest is recommended.
Q. Normal labor with bloody show is a final possibility.

