Wide QRS complex tachycardia (WCT), defined as heart rate (HR) >100 beats per minute (bpm) with a QRS duration >120 ms, is a common arrhythmia with potentially life-threatening consequences, making rapid and accurate diagnosis with initiation of appropriate therapy essential.
A. After recognition of this arrhythmia, the clinician must immediately evaluate the patient for hemodynamic stability. If the patient is unstable, then Advanced Cardiac Life Support (ACLS) protocol should be initiated with direct current (DC) cardioversion of the patient. If the rhythm is sustained but tolerated or if it is not sustained, then the clinician should perform an evaluation with the goal of differentiation between ventricular tachycardia (VT) and supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) with aberrant conduction. Prognosis and therapy of these two conditions differ considerably.
B. The clinical history can be helpful in suggesting a diagnosis. Presence of prior myocardial infarction (MI) and structural heart disease is the strongest clinical predictor of VT. Patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy and WCT will have VT >98% of the time. Advanced age and presence of congestive heart failure (CHF) also favor VT. Younger patients or adults with a history of recurrent tachycardia since a young age or for >3 years are more likely to have SVT with aberrancy. Symptoms during tachycardia may be far ranging, from malaise to syncope. It is a common misconception that WCT is less likely to be VT if it is hemodynamically stable. Many VTs are hemodynamically tolerated and dismissing this diagnosis can lead to inappropriate triage and therapy, with subsequent cardiovascular collapse.
After assessment of vital signs, the physical examination should be directed toward noting evidence of atrioventricular (AV) dissociation, which is frequently seen in VT but rarely in SVT. Beat-to-beat change in blood pressure, variability in Sâ‚, and cannon A waves are all signs of AV dissociation. Carotid massage that terminates the arrhythmia indicates that the AV node was involved in the tachycardia circuit and that the mechanism is an SVT.
C. A 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) offers a great deal more information than a rhythm strip and should be obtained promptly. A prior ECG can also offer helpful clues. If there is evidence of ventricular pre-excitation or previous bundle branch block with similar morphology to the WCT, then it suggests SVT with aberrancy. If there are Q waves or other evidence of prior MI, the case for VT is supported.
D. Initial evaluation of the ECG should begin with the search for P waves and their relationship to the QRS. Dissociation of the P from the QRS or other evidence of AV dissociation, such as fusion or capture beats, is diagnostic of VT. It should be noted that the rate of the WCT does not reliably differentiate VT from SVT and that, although irregularity suggests atrial fibrillation, it can also be seen at the onset and termination of VT.
E. If the initial assessment fails to yield a diagnosis, more detailed analysis is necessary. This is done by identifying the WCT as right bundle branch block (RBBB)-type (V1 positive) or left bundle branch block (LBBB)-type (V1 negative) and applying specific morphologic criteria.
F. In RBBB-type WCT, a ventricular origin is suggested by QRS complex duration >140 ms, left axis deviation, a single (R) or biphasic (QR or RS) R wave in lead V1, or a triphasic R wave in lead V1 with the initial R wave taller than the secondary R wave, R:S ratio of <1 in V6, positive concordance.
G. In LBBB-type WCT, a ventricular origin is suggested by QRS complex >160 ms, a broad (>40 ms) R in V1, notching of the QRS and/or delayed downstroke with R to S interval >100 ms in V1, right axis deviation, a Q wave in V6, negative concordance.
Unless there is definitive evidence that the WCT is SVT, one should never use adenosine or verapamil because it may lead to rapid hemodynamic collapse. Procainamide is the preferred agent for pharmacologic control of WCT.

